react Results
impact
and
We're going to go.
We're going to go.
We're going to go.
Wait.
And then I'll say,
the future will be better.
And then I'll say,
the future will be better.
Yeah, it's going.
So, I'm going to be able to
have my own.
It's not.
It's not.
It's not.
We'll be able to have our own.
and for Jr Mich round
I'm Edward Nersesian, the director of the
Healing Center and I want to welcome you to this joint meeting between the Commutee
Freud and the Healing Center at the New York Psychoanalytic Institute and Society.
This meeting which has to do with this content in the society at the moment was proposed
to us by the Commutee Freud and Emil Mallet and Maria and we are very happy for being
able to organize it under our auspices.
I will ask the president of the New York Psychoanalytic to say a few words.
Dr. Eunbachinga.
My name is Eunbachinga.
I am the director of the National Commutee.
I am the associate of the National Psychoanalytic Institute at the New York and later at the New
York at the Zeta Uni.
I recommend it to verge to be famed as a York Ri BAT.
Want to ask a question.
Please call ourselves in favor of the
speech on religious laws and political crisis taking place in the operation of the
!"
at this case the
extremism.
This d
it is correlated with the
He fanc butcherry's proverb
and his words
can pick up
a lot
of people
Who feels
formation
Poke Burn Baggins
wa
narrow
allows
a dozen
mAh I have CeRock in their language,
I have say something for meditation in
Redmond, ausc fined and personalized
housing, I won with family.
Come on, browse the
next meet introduced response
for attention
the U.S.
a Grassel of Sigmund Freud.
Pierre Vanu, a two.
Thank you.
Dr. Mark Smaler, President of the American Psychoanalytic,
and the American Psychoanalytic Association.
Thank you, Ed.
I'd like to thank the Helix Center in New York Psychoanalytic
for hosting, obviously a very timely Congress.
Maria asked me last spring,
when we were in Stockholm, if I might join you,
and I'll be able to be here for part of the day,
but as I have thought about what this Congress,
this committee will be addressing,
two things came to my mind.
And it began last Wednesday evening,
Wednesday afternoon, in between patients.
I kept getting alerts on my phone
that there had been a shooting in San Bernardino,
in California, about 40 miles east of Los Angeles.
I paid attention, but then went back to my patients,
and then that evening was meeting my wife for dinner.
We went through the whole dinner,
and I completely forgot about the shootings.
And I wanted to just say something about
that kind of forgetting.
Number one, I'm kind of numb,
as I think many people are in this country,
in terms of the frequency of these mass shootings,
whether they be political or just the individual rampage
of somebody compelled to kill him or herself and others.
But that numbness has set in, for me,
over the last couple years.
The other hesitation, I think, that led to my forgetting,
to speak about this, is that when my wife was six years old,
and though the memories are a bit cloudy,
she was in her first grade class in the north shore of Chicago
and sitting at her desk,
and there were, she heard popping noises from outside the classroom.
The next thing she remembers is huddling under her teacher's desk
and the teacher telling her and her fellow students to be very quiet.
And there was more commotion, more popping in the hallway
outside the classroom, and then silence.
And what had happened was a 30-year-old,
very troubled, very disturbed woman,
had gone into this elementary school
and began shooting children and teachers,
left the school and went and shot down the street
and saw some house in the neighborhood.
This was somebody who had been under psychiatric care,
obviously not successful.
And so every time there is a shooting,
my wife relives that trauma.
And in that sense, it's close to me and to our family.
Our job, it seems to me, whether these kinds of violence
is individual, of an individual who's gone mad,
or a group that on the basis of an ideology imagines
that they have to kill in order to get that ideology across,
that is something that's psychoanalysts,
that this group and whether in Europe or in the US
and throughout the world, now we have something to offer.
I was telling someone last night at Ed's cocktail party
that I spent a day and a half in Washington, D.C.,
in September with our lobbyists,
and visiting staff of congressional leaders
to talk about are there ways that we can prevent
these kinds of mass shootings.
I live in a country that continues to be obsessed with guns
and cannot let go of guns.
If you read the statistics about the numbers of people killed
in our country with guns compared to anywhere else in the world,
it's shameful.
So we can talk with congressional leaders about that.
But what they're also very interested in is they're interested
in what we offer in everyday language,
a psychoanalytic perspective about what compels an individual
to do this.
And these kinds of meetings are critical and essential
and call us to leave our offices,
to stand up from behind the couch and go out into our communities,
our larger communities, like you all have come here today
and say something about it because the public is desperate for answers.
Because if not, that hopelessness, that helplessness that sets in,
that I experience every time I get that CNN alert on my phone
that there's been yet another shooting, that numbness sets in,
and we have to interfere with that.
We know something about the impact of hopelessness
and helplessness that creates that kind of numbness
and through our educating the public and offering what we have,
what we've known about the human experience,
but also what we can learn from our communities,
what we can learn from these acts of violence.
We have something to learn as psychoanalysts as well.
That's a very important piece of it.
But I think if we do that, we can have an impact.
And even if it just is to save some lives.
On my signature, on my email, I say,
psychoanalysis, now more than ever, psychoanalysis, now more than ever.
Thank you, and thank you for inviting me.
APPLAUSE
Dr. Charles Melman, who is the founder of the
Laconian Psychoanalytic Association,
International Laconian Psychoanalytic Association.
Dear friends of New York,
Moriel and Paris.
So there is one thing that surely we have in common with food
and probably with Lacon as well.
And that is that we haven't done any better than they have.
What do I mean by that?
I mean that we have failed to have academics as well as public opinion
take into account the case to the understanding of the world
that are provided by psychoanalysis.
Let us consider the greed and the dream problems that we have to face today.
We shall perceive that fruit and probably Lacon as well showed
that we had no choice but interpret and elaborate them
adequately if we were to solve them in an adequate way.
What does that imply?
It implies some form of complicity between former enemies.
Who thus become partners also?
They have to be given the information that will take them away from their blind hatred
of the other, which is none other than self-hatred.
But is there such a thing as justified hatred?
This point, however, is not the subject of our discussion today.
Fred and Lacon did see that Thanatos could be the overwhelming force.
Thus today, the world may be seen as divided into two groups.
On the one hand, we have the peoples whose only law is enjoyment,
and for the sake of enjoyment they are ready to sacrifice their own life.
The only thing that the two groups seem to have in common is an addictive
behavior pattern. No addiction, unfortunately, is not something that can be subject to
dialectics, which means that it is out of the reach of reason.
We wish to have the works of Fred listed among the world heritage sites
referenced by UNESCO.
You are well aware that such a step will not change the course of a story.
However, it will be a small stone paving the way for the possibility of a different future.
Thank you.
The first round table is on education, and the participants are Marilia Eisenstein,
Victor Azale, Paul Fry, Gerard Pomey, and Jean-Jacques Moskowitz.
The participants were delighted when my senior passport went on toisible in the
Thank you, Ed. So I have a great pleasure and honor to chair this first panel on education.
And it will be an open discussion if someone to read a paper or a short paper or part of
the paper and then discuss I think the best is to fee free.
But I will probably give to Professor Frye.
We'll start.
Well thank you and welcome all.
My French is equal to reading and comprehension but unfortunately very little to speaking.
So you will have to endure my English which I will at least attempt to enunciate slowly.
I chose this panel because of course while I have opinions about civilization and about
discontent I feel a little more qualified to speak about education.
In recent years in addition to the various duties you can imagine as an English professor
I have become the executive co-director of the Yale New Haven Teachers Institute and its
national emanation which is called the National Initiative.
And what we do is sponsor collegial content driven seminars for teachers preschool through
high school.
I have taught a great many of these in the summer time and during the course of teaching
them I have heard perhaps to invoke the word more meaningfully for the first time the discontent
of teachers.
And I am very much concerned that and by this I mean primarily what we call public school
teachers that is to say state and locally sponsored education as opposed to privately
sponsored education.
I am very much concerned about this and the paper that I have distributed takes up what
I take to be the two dominant modern philosophies of education neither of which I think are
in any way adequate to the needs of the student population in general and neither of which
I think sufficient even for the students whom it is best calculated to serve.
The first of these philosophies of education in a certain sense however consciously of
course is unclear.
Decends from Plato and the idea behind it is that you e-dos or draw out knowledge in
students through a process of warmth in atmosphere participation and encouragement of creativity.
This philosophy of education dominated educational thought in the 60s and the 70s what you might
call the Aquarian Age of education.
Another philosophy of education has largely supplanted it owing to the inadequacies of
previous one and that is a philosophy that seems to me derives most respectively speaking
from Locke because it seems to suppose that the mind is a blank wax tablet on which information
needs to be imprinted.
And it is obviously a very different attitude toward the mind and it puts teachers in the
same subject position exactly as students because teachers too are supposed to be blank
wax tablets on which both pedagogical skill and the content they teach need to be imprinted
and in this atmosphere we have what in English we call teaching to the test an emphasis on
core knowledge to be imparted largely by rote in classroom situations and in the teachers
own behavior the supposition that everything they do needs to be scripted.
In the French translation it says screeped and I'm afraid I think it should be screeped
and maybe acry day would be a clearer term I don't think the correct term is screeped.
In any case that's what we call what teachers are obliged to do both in preparing their daily
lesson plans and also in meeting the class.
You begin by saying good morning class as you're told to do and then your teaching duties
proceed from there all of them script well it seems to me that one great advantage of
invoking Freud on an occasion like this is that if we understand these two traditions
differently he can be seen to reconcile them.
On the one hand while he's no more interested in innate ideas than most people are since
Kant he nevertheless does have strongly inculcate us to recognize the as one of the preliminary
speakers said desire to learn the innate disposition to know or to learn which is in part driven
by infantile sexual researches.
The infant is as desperate to know the truth about the things that matter to him or her
as a philosopher is to know about the things that matter to him or her during the course
of growing up latency adolescence there's the great danger of course that this desire
to learn will be suppressed altogether.
On the other hand we can make something of the Lockean tradition if instead of the idea
of the blank wax tablet we keep in mind the notion Freud's notion of the mystic writing
pad in other words the palimpsest of imprinting that acknowledges the dynamic relationship
between unconscious drives and the effort all of us make to form something like a coherent
consciousness and it seems to me that the basis for pedagogy and for mediating the issues
of transference that have to be involved in education but that surround these two philosophies
of education crudely the platonic and the Lockean it seems to me that the issue for education
is understanding that the vagaries of human love which so much drive the wish to know
need to be through the transference transformed stabilized as a kind of object love that we
can call the love of understood ideas and by this means we need to recognize that both
the edible resistance to the mentor or teacher and the abject identification with the mentor
or teacher need to be curved mediated and a common ground between these radical extremes
both of which it seems to me can be recognized in the structure of discontent that concerns
us so much abject identification with the mentor of course has a great deal to do with
the formation of fundamental solidarity and edible resistance to the teacher sometimes
in the same personality has a great deal to do with the generation of hatred so it's
commonplace enough to say so but it seems to me that our task is finding through our
understanding of the dynamics of the transference a common ground between these undesirable extremes
thank you I'm sorry if I went on too long.
No you were not long told and it was I'm personally I was very moved.
Because you you really have a very psychoanalytical understanding of what teaching is I mean the
part of the casexis you have to casexis a person you have to have a strong casexis
on the teacher and then if things go well this casexis can go from the person of the
teacher to what he teaches and that seems very important and I was also very interested
in your paper to the place you give to philosophy saying that finally a child is in love with
philosophy because he wants to understand how mind the mind works.
Thank you.
Who wants to react?
Yes.
I can.
Yes.
I can.
I can.
I can.
I can.
I can.
I can.
I can.
I can.
I can.
I can.
I can.
I can.
I can.
I can.
I can.
I can.
But listening to the president speaker first, I am speaking that there is no relationship
evident between education and teaching.
Because on the method, at this because in the method teaching does not let speak of anything
especially not speak of about sexuality, about drives,
about what any kind of obscenity
that is repressed by the common education.
And it's on the contrary of psychoanalysis
who's first, I don't know to say, the rule is to let speak,
to let speak the free association, which are not free,
which are all going back to the drives,
to the obscenity of drives,
which is not permitted by good education.
In principle, there is no way to join education
and psychoanalysis on the method.
But in fact, anybody can see that there is in the life,
there is a strong relationship.
I mean that education as well as psychoanalysis
are the same boundary with the prohibition of incest.
And this prohibition is,
is what?
Commanding, commande.
Yes, commande.
Insisted on, demanded?
Demanded, yes.
Yes.
Demanding, demanding the repression.
There is a strong relationship
between what is so necessary
in the, in the,
in what is the way psychoanalysis is leading to,
that means to two main things
that has something to do with this contents,
that is resolution of the symptoms by speaking,
because only speaking as a subject and the symptom
has no subject and speaking is making some,
some help.
First thing against this content,
and second thing is the dissolution of the edifice complex
as the end of analysis on the front end
is a way to understand it.
And so on this way it's very clear
that analysis has something very strong
to see with education,
but the method are not the same.
So we are, I mean, we have a good orientation
by speaking first of the question of education.
A way to educate that has nothing to see with science.
Science has not been able to civilly-see
the mind of the people.
Always this discontent is going on,
on his basis of sexual discontent,
and science itself is changing,
and is now like a new religion,
trying to give explanation of what are the sources
of this contents, but outside of the sexual reasons,
and outside of the prohibition of incest,
which is the law on which the edifice complex tech
is universality, and which are the way
in which we are trying to civilize,
civilize the desire, always savage,
because taking within this discontent.
But maybe I will not say no more from now,
and after in the discussion, to say no.
If I understood well,
Girard Pamele you are saying that psychoanalysis
and education have the same aim,
but it totally, totally controversial or different method.
One is contracting, and the other is deconstructing.
Yes, that's it.
There's a wonderful paradox in your paper
that I admire very much, and the idea is that education
or pedagogy advocates free speech,
yet speaks under inhibition,
and psychoanalysis fully acknowledges
that language is a prison house within which we struggle,
and is much more skeptical about free speech,
while at the same time articulating issues
that pedagogy tends to wince away from.
It's a wonderful paradox.
I wonder how it's affected by the loss of verbal inhibition,
let's say in post-war times.
It's true that the schools, and here again,
I speak only from American experience,
are remarkably alert senses,
very frequently on the subject of sexuality,
but at the same time there is among students,
and of course among teachers too,
the common currency of freedom to speak about these things
in less formal situations.
So I would think that there would be a slight erosion
of this paradox,
perhaps not for the good or for any productive end,
owing to the collapse of verbal inhibitions
in the last few generations.
I don't know what you would think about that.
The sexual education I am speaking of
is not the sexual education of free speech,
or on how to make love or things like that.
It's something like a more profound
that includes the discontent of what is coming
from the edipus complex.
And of that, there is no speech, nowhere possible,
because it's a very personal thing.
I mean, the men, like the women,
are afraid of their own desire,
which is coming from the discontent itself,
and it's only analysis we can do,
we can make that more civilized.
We can come to terms with it, rationally perhaps,
but not emotionally.
Yes.
Yes.
It makes sense because you have discourses,
which are very, very welcome-stranded,
and very intelligent and full of culture,
but what Andre Green would call dead discourses,
because when the discourse is no more rooted in the drives,
it becomes totally different, concrete.
Yes. For example, what is coming from our buzzies culture,
is some kind of hate of the feminine.
Of the feminine, I say.
I mean, of the castration.
And this can be educated by rational ways,
but only with personal ways like analysis.
That's why we have, I mean,
something very unique to give to civilization,
and with these contents.
Yes.
Yes, yes.
Thank you.
I speak in France, excuse me.
It would be much easier to own our plans,
and to do some stuff.
Excellent.
We're so thrilled.
We are so grateful,
and the architects of coming here
are two separate groups.
I really want to be very bummed that my studies were to be Osse
beating his fucking hair...
OK.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Now, what's interesting?
As such,Sizey wishes that necessary
are all leading together by clearer approaches
and which we are facing answered
and thousands of Sturke
different conflict
choices
And phrases and sounds
And the country has been working hard.
So we are looking at all the electric values
and our
jetson, and Marvel engineers
who spoke at its own
communities, that make a Beta for the
planet.
I have read they have the same
sound of
but apparently this is the kept up with the Excellent
entrepreneurs now
somehow so often
there's an charred
for Erma Fan Kills
that's why absolutely
is the case
and this actually does not
I'm not them
directly at the stage
point or third
involved a set of
collaboration
the
co- owner and
the
mberg
that
it is
the
opponent
the
live this historic meaning.
Today,
we will be shooting at the Introductory
Madden
Show
It's not the second term, but this means education,
realize that to get involved and consider
What kind of
sustainable
private
professions
and
is
going to produce
with
clients
Ins,
we
are
developing
through the trauma
Jinnah
application, heavily
Oh, yes.
On the 10th planet and originally Temrob voluntary planet
there and we meet in need, continuing continuingarrow
and eye Judith is never mentors
and lives and kind of essays.
Do you ever have
to moderate  age
not have Random
newly
The Ministry Council should also consider to a conclusion that's all natural 2 cases.
3 particular 3 borderline different cases, and 14 both Muslim cause analysis,
4hn prefix etc.
anonica and adapt Lancia,
etc.
I would like to thank you for the support of the church,
and to the people who are here,
and to the people who are here,
and to the church, the church,
and to the church, the church, the church,
and to the church, the church.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Martyn.
One question.
Did everybody understood French?
And shall I make a very brief summary?
Yes, ma'am.
I'll try to.
It's not so easy.
But Jean-Jacques Muscovic started saying how moved he was
to speak in New York in this symposium,
especially after the tragic Paris events,
and what happened yesterday in San Bernardino.
He evoked the hate of humanity,
and went back to Freud's papers on human destructivity.
He picked up one expression,
which is an expression that one can find in Freud's 1916
Y War, no considerations on war,
where he speaks of the individual people,
the individual mass.
And then he said that he thinks that the word discontent
is a very feeble word,
that one should say more, something like
destructivity, something more
than discontent.
Then he went to the relation between infantile sexuality
and saying that nowadays religion and moral
is no more able to contain the violence,
which starts with infantile sexuality.
He quoted Andre Mallejo, who in 1953,
already said about he had a premonition saying that
if the 21st century is not a religious century,
it won't exist.
So he had the idea of the danger of the religion now.
Now, he, Jean-Pierre Mascavitch,
if I understood well,
closed his remarks by seeing how much education,
social education, education, teaching,
is important, of course, as we already said,
in the round table, but how much it can also be something
which is totally insufficient,
because it can totally erase the unconscious fantasy.
And he said something which for me is very important.
He said we should be very much aware
of the seduction of the terrorist attacks,
the seduction of violence of destitute activity,
because of course we are all,
we have a fundamental violence in all of us.
Yes, yes.
Yes, yes, yes.
No, of course.
No, no.
The truth is that the truth is not to be
the truth is not to be the truth.
The truth is that the truth is not to be the truth.
It is not to be the truth.
It is to be the truth.
The truth is that the truth is not to be the truth.
The truth is that the truth is not to be the truth.
The truth is that the truth is not to be the truth.
The truth is that the truth is not to be the truth.
The truth is that the truth is not to be the truth.
The truth is that the truth is not to be the truth.
The truth is that the truth is not to be the truth.
The truth is that the truth is not to be the truth.
The truth is that the truth is not to be the truth.
The truth is that the truth is not to be the truth.
The truth is that the truth is not to be the truth.
The truth is that the truth is not to be the truth.
The truth is that the truth is not to be the truth.
The truth is that the truth is not to be the truth.
The truth is that the truth is not to be the truth.
One thing that will probablyique the subject from your family is development today,
the
textile
That's for you or the intrigued
You get issue as so whole as we
I think that's a very important thing.
I think that the people who are in the U.S.
are in the U.S.
and in the U.S.
are in the U.S.
and in the U.S.
and in the U.S.
and in the U.S.
so there are many people who are in the U.S.
and in the U.S.
and in the U.S.
and in the U.S.
and in the U.S.
And are pigs for his Drag
America?
The
Okay, I'll try very, very briefly.
Big Dawahdulay was saying that the previous speaker was as pessimist as Freud was.
We all know Freud's pessimism and he rose then two questions saying that first of all
reading the paper and listening to Muscovitch wrote to his mind that the word discontent
is becoming a crucial psychoanalytical concept which is at the core of our daily work.
And then that he heard in the speech of Muscovitch something which was of an urgency, urgency
to find answers, urgency to react, urgency to understand. And he says, Victor Azulay said,
that between the discontent and the urgency, there was something which was lacking which
is the work of education. And the, that education is what is constituting finally the identity.
And I think that you were finally making a link to the next round table between education
and identity of course, because to be educated one must have, one must be constructing his
own identity with education.
I would like to mention that Raj said the  Owl had to Professor
something that the people middle from.
Live from the old mes Hangs.
in combination with the local
which the people and the local area
these are actual
is one where there is going to be a
to help raise money and you will see that our problem is not
possible to forgive those people and Trustees not to seem to
more than they report so that we are willing to
look at the approval of audit of the
potner in these
but I could ask you, whether I have your integrated
OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO more often
if you devoted yourself
Okay. Please.
I feel that probably one duty we have before us is to discuss quayons.
Mr. Poemier makes a very interesting distinction in his paper between to believe that and to
believe in qua qua, which I think bears careful examination because there's certainly a difference.
We have a kind of a philosophical feeling about believing that.
I believe that such and such is the case, for example.
Whereas we have a religious, perhaps a squeamish religious feeling about believing in.
And yet the whole concept of belief, it seems to me, still has very much to do with identity
formation.
Perhaps we all of necessity and spontaneously believe something.
I feel very much as though I were on the couch and so I will confess that I believe painfully
little myself, which in a certain sense perhaps exempts me.
I don't think you need to worry too much about my turning violent tomorrow as a result.
But on the other hand, I'm often the sort of person who's often accused of creating
an intellectual void into which fanaticism can rush.
I resist the charge, but at the same time it's this question.
Whether or not there is a structure of belief that actually resists fanaticism, for example,
somehow or another based on coming to terms with the understanding of the violence within
or whether on the other hand the resistance to fanaticism is in a certain sense necessarily
a resistance to belief as such.
I would like, I would be very interested in hearing that question pursued.
You know, you reminded me, Ron Britton, British psychoanalyst, wrote a lot about belief in
relation to what we call internal reality.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
And I think it's very important what you said and belief can of course be part of internal
reality and then be worked through.
Or if it's not worked through, it can exactly go to fanaticism or delusion.
I should tell you something about education.
Freud in 1916 wrote, We Believe That Civilization has been created under the pressure of the
large extent being constantly created anew since each individual who makes a fresh entry
into human society repeats this sacrifice of institutional satisfaction for the benefit
of the whole community by refusing of this sacrifice, the new individual necessarily
comes up against the discontent present in civilization and today is the same problem.
Any comment?
Yes, maybe.
The comment that as Mr. Mark Smalert said, we have to learn.
We have to learn not only thinking that violence is founding itself on some personal problems
of people who are a problem to finish with with their parents and so on.
But there is something specifically cultural.
And this is what is specifically cultural is not only the fault of the author.
There is not in one way the religious people, we are fighting against religion for atheism
which permits to finish with this kind of violence on one side and ourselves, our societies
who are at least and who have finished with this violence.
This is not true.
We have our own violence and we have to confess it as well.
I mean, it's not only the other culture which is in theological, political violence, our
self as well are in this violence.
I mean, capitalism is not something on the side of a taste in a very evident way.
It is as well a theological, political commandment, a criterion one to be on the wealthy side,
to be the strongest there is competition violence in scripted with our belief and our belief
in God as well is written on each dollar in God we trust.
So I think we have to learn to and to think about that as well.
Perhaps I can open the discussion to the audience if someone wants to, yes, please.
Yes, I would like to try to remember and give those other words.
But I have a good round of words.
Does it matter?
Does it matter?
Does it matter to be the truth?
And the comments you just made and bring them together in order to also make a connection
between the question of education and the larger social, cultural, and political questions
we are considering.
You know, Adorno in his famous article on after Auschwitz said the role of education
should be to create autonomous citizens who can critically enter into the public sphere
and challenge, question, evaluate the ideology, belief, solutions, whatever you want to call
them with a group.
And I appreciate your stress on the role of transference in education and character formation
in the classroom is my calling.
As someone who has taught in university, I have had occasion to observe that there is
as much transference in a seminar room as there is in the consulting room.
So the point I want to make is that if we think of education in terms of the idea which
utilizes the transference of the teacher, I think the goal should be as you suggested
is to take the transference, take the identifications, and transform them into a situation where
the student identifies with the teacher in terms of his or her critical capacities, dedication
to truth, willingness to call things into question.
And he or herself becomes an autonomous critical thinker.
And to connect that to your last remark about the distinction between believing in and believing
that, you might say a secular identity is one that is committed only to believing in when
believing in is justified, what the analytic philosophers used to call that justified a
surgeon or justified belief.
So that if one is cathected that stance, that identity, then all believing in should be
subject to inquiry, criticism, and to see if they can be translated into a justified believing
that.
Thank you.
Emi Malle.
Good morning, friends.
As co-founder with Charles Melmont, I want to say something about what I heard this morning.
The Freud Committee was founded to explain why today Freud could be not an explication,
but could be very accurate to understand what is coming in extremism, in nationalities,
in a dead drive.
And I think it's very important not to take Freud as a commentator, as a journalist like
I am of the actuality, but to understand what is happening today, and I try to speak in
French and Maria will translate.
And I hope you answer the answer from my other hand.
and the other was that the medicalization of psychoanalysis.
The other was that the medicalization of psychoanalysis.
The real approach that Americans make against Freud is a constitutive identity.
There are many heading to
the world they're queuing gap that theletists might be doing in stereotyping."
There was an excuse to quote Bob Cohen's
hope that he has a bias of our marvelous identity.
murder.
INE
in Paris, in San Bernardino, and in Arabia show that Freud was right first.
or has acquired the needlu
and Umua
and the
in reclaiming the —
the
So now Europe and United States, Arabia, we all have a chance to get together to realize this point that in fact the death drive and the life drive, eros and Thanatos can be...
Can go side by side.
One point in common between Freud and the Americans is that Freud and Americans read the Bible.
What does the Bible say about the drive?
The Bible says that the death drive and the life drive go side by side, hand in hand, but we have to choose the life drive.
The Bible says that Freud and Americans are not able to do this, but they are not able to do this.
And we can see from Freud's work and his life how he put the arrows before Thanatos.
In conclusion, it's worth talking to the plural of Freud, itself with someone who believes in Christ, his future falconment is theement of Writing & Economics of his english.
And I think that the economists who won the Nobel Prize,
Edwin Felds said that in taking a risk, an economic risk,
for progress and for life, Freud taught us more than an economist.
Thank you.
Yes, please.
I'm not current with Freud.
I haven't read Freud probably in 30 or 40 years.
And I don't condone violence.
Schopenhauer, to describe the concept of resenting a deep abiding resentment, anger.
I understand what motivated those people in California and those people in Paris.
We are told that anti- that any criticism of Israel is anti-Semitic,
that anti-Zionism is anti-Semitic, and we're not allowed to discuss these issues at all of it,
as led to our committing unbelievable atrocities in the Middle East.
I understand the rage that people can feel when they feel that their own people are being assaulted,
and they have no way to even cry about that.
I don't condone violence.
I don't condone the slaughter of innocent people, but I do not feel that I am innocent.
I don't think anybody sitting in this room is innocent.
French foreign policy is as much an atrocity as American foreign policy.
French history with colonialism is as much an atrocity as what the United States has done
over my entire lifetime.
And I think that more than Thanos and Eros being part of the human personality,
I think we have to speak about our own personal responsibility for where we have led this world.
And I think you're being far too gentle on ourselves here.
We bear responsibility for what we're facing today, every one of us.
Thank you.
Well, first I think you can hear in the responses both of Monsieur Moskowitz and Monsieur B'omé
the acknowledgment of a violence within and especially of a violence from the standpoint of superiority,
which is, let's say, the structure of a self-condonation, although it doesn't emphasize it,
our task today to think about Freud in relation to these matters.
And in that regard, I'd like to go back to the death drive.
In beyond the pleasure principle, Freud toys controversially with biological metaphors,
as we know, and speculates that the death drive is the wish of the organism to return to a simpler state.
In other words, in a certain sense, to uncomplicate itself to the point of a zero degree.
That's, it seems to me, an extremely challenging and, can I say, seductive speculation,
because I think one of the things we need to acknowledge feeling in ourselves is precisely that wish for
a return to a simpler, organismic state.
The question to me is the relation between the death drive and quéons.
And quéons, and belief.
To believe that one, to wish, to be with God in saying, for example, Allah is great,
is, it seems to me, a more or less open and direct expression of the death wish.
But on the other hand, not to backtrack and rehabilitate quéons, because what I said before is really my stance on these things.
But on the other hand, it's clear that there's a sense in which one might believe in something that affirms life.
And that if, you know, given the premise of the necessity of belief, which in a certain sense, for example, marks acknowledged,
one might at least think of education as a matter of cultivating those beliefs in something that affirms life.
Rather than, rather than in something that makes us wish immediately to leave life so as to be with something higher.
I totally agree with you and with your comments.
I just wanted to add that I really think that the definition that was given by Freud in the outline of what his death drive
is extremely important because it shows that death drive is important in every, even in the thinking process.
It is to separate.
And to think we have to put things together when little children, you teach them that Annapal and Epea, they are fruits.
But he also has to learn that Annapal is different than Epea and they have to be separated.
So death drive is in the thinking process of everyday's life.
But what you mentioned, it can also go to this belief of total tranquility.
And that, and beyond, and that, yes, of course.
I have to...
You wanted to speak and then jump, and then jump.
So...
and steps in the image.
That is what brings us to the folks
in our system for Blanca.
We are constantly able to
No.
See for Traduina.
Yes.
Yeah.
Jaujia Mascovic was underlining that Freud spoke already in 1916 of the enigma of this
activity and hate and that is an answer to the edla fibles, la completude.
We, the unerability of human, it's an answer to human vulnerability.
So there are two choices or education and the work of civilization and he didn't say
that, but I think I was thinking of Kultur-Aghabite and or Babarisma.
Yes.
I think with the question of Paul Free, maybe we are reaching to a point that Freud has
lived as a question, a point where Freud has only give something for us to look for because
he says it, I think, in a special way.
Why to prefer to be dead, to answer to the death drive, to prefer to be near the father,
which is in the sky, I mean the father of the religion.
Why to prefer death?
Because it's like that the mass murderers, they know they will die as well.
And I think that Freud has not answered to the question, what is a father?
He has not answered because there is no possibility of answer in the sense that father is always
a son and there is a choice between the dead father or the son who wants to be a father.
And he can't answer to this question.
I mean, on this point to be like the father is to be like the dead father.
I mean, when a son wants to be a father, he identifies himself to the dead father.
He wants to kill his father, his own father.
And so there is a circle and there we are maybe a question to answer to.
Something that Freud has not solved, I think.
Manja?
A couple things to respond to the panel.
And I teach community college for many years and I also teach students who have difficulties
with English, immigrant students.
I run a program for them and I'm also a psychoanalyst in private practice.
So I have a little bit of both of these fields.
I wanted to say one thing about the idea of Dr. Fry said about love of understood ideas
and to touch on the point of Jean-Jacques's point of the seductions of violence and to
maybe hypothesize that it's making understood ideas less understood or putting castration
as an opening to combat the seductions of violence on the part of teachers and the part
of opening discussion that makes something possible.
And nobody said today, I mean, the important point that education is one of the impossible
professions for Freud, right?
So we're dealing with a point of impossibility and to kind of make that point of impossibility
exciting.
And I have the point that we all share that we can't finally, finally have an answer
to.
The death drive would be on the side of the finally, right?
So that was one point, one first point.
So the idea that understood ideas lack, that understood ideas are never finally understood
or could always be understood another way, right?
So that's the opening towards education.
That was one, and then the other is that I think that some I think that still on France
and this thanks you are doing valuable education, colleague and manager, then, simply on this
add-up or an example of their own intellectual educationMAs who we have a tiny of work you
It's very difficult to understand the truth.
It's very difficult to understand the truth.
So for some of them it's fantastic and revolutionary to come to school.
They can talk about sex, they can talk, they feel they can talk about anything.
So these, they're not as separate as they used to be long time ago.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I wanted to apologize for the phrase.
I didn't mean by understood ideas, received ideas.
I meant ideas thought through autonomously with the understanding of course that they always need to be thought through again.
At the risk of responding as the superficial American psychoanas, just a couple of thoughts.
I'm so glad to be here and I would like to be able to stay longer but I can't in these issues.
But especially regarding education.
Like you, I, for 14 years, ran a program in an alternative public high school in Chicago working with mostly kids, adolescents and gangs.
Having most of whom it experienced unspeakable trauma by the time they're 10, 12 years old.
And their involvement in the gangs begins to make absolute sense that having had the experiences that they've had, had any of us had similar experiences.
We too would have wanted to be a part of something beyond ourselves as a way to repair the damage of that original trauma.
On the surface, and again, remember I said I was trained in Chicago.
I used to sneak into lectures of Heinz Cojat who had obviously a great influence on my psychoanalytic career.
One of the fascinating things when you observe what looks on the surface like the most self-destructive behavior and a wish to die.
That by the time the kids are sent to the alternative high school, that's what they're up against.
It is amazing and remarkable and something that's humbling as a psychoanalyst to see that we provided treatment right in the school.
Psychoanalytic treatment, individual and group treatment right in the school.
So they would have math class and then they might come to a group. They would have English class and then see an individual therapist who was either an analyst or psychoanalytically oriented.
The transformation in a relatively short period of time of that aggressive violent behavior is remarkable.
The experience of being listened to, being heard, having an opportunity to have someone witness one's internal state.
And the transformation of that's what seems like inevitable violent behavior like a gang experience provides begins to fall away.
The death instinct, if you will, begins some kind of a transformation into a wish to live, into a wish to learn.
Now we've all experienced this in our offices, but to see it dramatically in terms of adolescents who are so violent by the time they come to school, high school,
and to see the little bit of a compassionate and pathic experience become transformative, like I said, is very humbling to the psychoanalyst.
And I think the question is, is there something we can learn from that at the risk of sounding superficial? Thank you.
Thank you, Mark.
Yes.
I just want to add something, what you said.
That is to say, we cannot divorce education from the social cultural environment.
And of course, the creation of institution at the time, or the problem of institution at the time of fraud was completely different than what we have to cope with.
That is to say, sexuality is no more an issue in repression.
The market has invaded our way of life, and the market is extremely permissive in relation to our driver instincts.
It's very permissive.
And of course, in this social cultural environment, the identity formation is much more complex and has become, in a way, a sociological issue.
One should not forget that the terrorists in Paris were all coming from prison, delinquency, criminality and so on.
It means that they have totally failed the process of the identification.
In other words, we cannot discuss education in the old way, in the way it is perhaps still authorized to the elite, which has a way to promote the elitist education with certain tutors, professors and so on,
going to Harvard and Yale later on, if the parents can afford it.
We are living in a very, very divided society where a lot of people, especially in outside the cities in France, are totally devoid of the normal educational process.
Yes, thank you. I would like to add something which is linked to all what was said.
Now, in the construction of the ego of a little child, let's say about four years old, when there is difficulty, the child may have a little child.
He may become phobic, which is a system of a defense system.
If this phobic defense cannot be constructed because there is a failure, there are more serious difficulties.
Shall I take an example? All the child can become phobic and have a phobia of cats, like little hans with horses.
But if he cannot construct this phobia, because the environment is not good enough, instead of that, he will not have a psychic defense, but he will start saying, I do not like cats.
And from I do not like cats, he can go to I hate cats. And then to, all cats are hateable. And finally, we should kill all cats.
Have a good one, only? Yes. I should forward concern after me today as always numerous factors of social, cultural or political unrest,
which underlie contemporary discontent produced in individuals at the loss-fricant, identically disturbances,
more destabilizing that the mere feeling of this quiet, individual identity problems are complicated by a new ennishiness,
they are no due to an insidious instability produced by external disturbance, social, economic, cultural and political,
certainly tangled together, exercising their competitive, destructive effect on a disoriented subject who feels lost these disturbance and divine,
with the internal crossroads of fidelity uncertainties, creating fricy in the destabilized sense of self.
Thank you. I think we will end this panel. I want to thank the speakers and to thank everybody.
So there is a lunch break and then everybody back here will be there. The noon meeting which will start precisely at 2 o'clock.
