Hi, good afternoon everybody.
Welcome to the Helix Center.
My name is Jerry Herwitz.
I'm one of the organizers here at the Helix.
And I want to make a full-to brief introduction to our moderator today.
And Marie Louvine is herself an artist, painter and poet.
And she will moderate this panel discussion and introduce you to our distinguished panelists.
Okay, thank you.
My mic is off.
Oh, can you just...
Yeah.
My issues.
I think we also...
Whoops.
Good too much.
I think we're also supposed to remind you that there's a conference on December 1st.
The...
Right?
I don't have the information...
The SciArt conference.
The SciArt conference, which you can see on the website.
It's fully explained.
So today we're going to attempt to tell you about American poetry today.
It's only a beginning.
So to introduce the program, the American poet Ezra Pound proclaimed that poetry is news
that stays news.
On a different note, his contemporary William Carlos Williams said that it is difficult
to get the news from poems, yet men die miserably every day for lack of what is found there.
Do modernist maxim such as these also define the ever-expanding range and diversity of
poetry today.
Which poets or groups are doing interesting or important work?
Who are the earlier poets that inspired them?
And what is the nature, role, appeal, and significance of contemporary poetry?
When it comes to grasping experiences and communicating their meaning, what does this art form provide?
What kind of subjects to poetry journals and other publications focus on?
How has the production and promotion and reception of poetry changed in the internet age?
It's very much about the internet age and the 21st century.
In response to questions such as these, around table of diverse and accomplished poets, we'll
discuss what's going on in the poetry world today.
They will explore the allure and value of contemporary poetry through different lenses
ranging from the formal to the linguistic to the conceptual to the psychological.
And in the second part of the program, we'll have our usual Q&A.
I'm going to introduce the participants in alphabetical order and ask you each to raise
your hands as I say your name so people will know who you are.
Patricia Carlin received her PhD from Princeton focusing on Shakespeare studies and poetry
and poetics.
Her most recent poetry collection, Second Nature, appeared in May 2017.
These books include Quantum Jitters and Original Green, Poetry Collections, and Shakespeare's
Mortal Man, a study of Shakespeare's plays in their cultural context.
She's published widely in journals and anthologies such as Playad, verse, Boulevard, Bomb, American
Letters and Commentary.
And is this right, McSweeney's internet tendency, right?
And she co-edits the Poetry Journal Barrow Street.
Honors include fellowships at the McDowell Colony and Virginia Center for the Creative
Arts.
She teaches literature and poetry writing at the New School where she has received the
University Distinguished Teaching Award.
Can everybody hear me?
Is this?
No.
Slow.
OK.
Amy Holman.
Amy Holman is a Pushcart Prize nominated poet and a literary consultant.
Her collection, Rin's Fly Through This Opened Window, was described by one reviewer as part
freak show, part searing insight.
She's also the author of four poetry chapbooks, including the prize-winning Wait for Me, I'm
Gone from Dream Horse Press.
Her poems have appeared in numerous magazines and anthologies, two numerous to name, including
Archaeology Magazine, American Letters and Commentary, Barrow Street, Fail Better, I'll
Stop.
But I'll end with the first anthology of TV poems and the best American poetry in 1999.
She teaches poetry workshops at the Hudson Valley Writers Center.
Paolo Javier.
This collaboration with Listening Center, David Mason, appeared as a limited edition
book cassette.
Oh, his name I cannot pronounce.
You have to help me.
Earlier.
OK.
Published by Text and Town in early 2017, a featured artist in MoMA PS1's 2015 Greater New York
Show.
He is the author of four full-length collections of poetry, including Court of the Dragon,
which Publishers Weekly calls a linguistic time machine.
A new chapbook, Maybe the Sweet Honey Poor is forthcoming from Nion Editions.
And last but not least, Stephen Massamilla is a poet, scholar, professor and painter.
He holds an MFA in writing and PhD in English and comparative literature with a focus on
poetry from Columbia University.
His new multi-genre volume, Cooking with the Muse, won the Eric Hopper Book Award, the
National Indie Excellence Award and others.
His previous books include the award-winning poetry collections, The Plague, Doctor in
His Holeshape, TAT, Forty Floors from Yesterday, and later on Aia, as well as translations
of book length works by Neruda and a critical study of myth in modern poetry.
Massamilla has published recently in hundreds of journals and anthologies.
Again, the list is too long.
Agni-American literary review, Barrow Street, Colorado review, Denver, quarterly poet,
lower poet daily.
He teaches literature and writing at Columbia University and the new school.
Okay, that's it.
I guess I have to get my microphone back.
And yeah.
If it works, can you hear me?
I'm not going to talk much.
Yes, is this all right?
Okay.
So I'm going to ask Steven to say a few words to begin the program.
Very good.
I would like to thank Anne Marie for that gracious introduction and thank all the panelists for
being here today and thank everyone in the audience for joining us to share an afternoon
talking about poetry.
I've been tasked with the impossible mission of conveying to you the various strands of
modern contemporary poetry and to do so in just a few minutes when it would normally take
me about 400 hours.
So I better get started.
I thought I'd start by just pointing to something unusual.
This is counterintuitive, but this project that Anne Marie mentioned, cooking with the
muse, is a cookbook that's also a poetry book that contains hundreds of recipes and
hundreds of poems and some recipes that could be poems and that's the most avant-garde aspect
of it.
But I just thought I would point out some poems in the book to show you that they look different.
These are all contemporary and some of them modern poems, but here's one called spice
reflection.
It's a sonnet, a love poem set in a restaurant.
I wrote this one myself.
Oh, by the way, this one's paired with a recipe for duck cohen feet, spice with coriander
and star anise, which is wonderful to make this time of year if you're not committed
to having turkey for Thanksgiving.
There are turkey recipes here too.
The poem it's like to write about swans.
The only problem with swan for Thanksgiving is that everybody fights over the neck.
Here's a recipe.
Here's another poem by Claude McKay, Harlem Renaissance Poet.
You see it's also a sonnet.
So without explaining what a sonnet is, you can see they look very much alike.
Here's another one by the contemporary poet, Vietnamese American poet, Manglan.
It's called love poem to spinach.
As you see, all the lines are scattered across the page and it looks very different.
And others might look more like, I mean, there are more sonnets by people from all
different.
A supermarketing California by Alan Ginsburg and the first line of the poem is what thoughts
I have of you tonight, Walt Whitman, and it's written in long with manian lines.
So if these are all, and I write lines like that too, I don't just write sonnets.
So the point I wanted to make is there's not one form that writers are writing in today.
Some people may think that there's a 19th century way of writing that's all formalist
and then there's a modern way of writing that's all open.
But the terrain is much more complicated than that.
So I thought I'd just mention briefly that there is even a group of new formalist poets,
Dana Joya, Marilyn Hacker.
You could think of many Alfred Corn, right.
I mean, a lot of us can think of an example to a right almost exclusively in form.
They write sonnets, they write villainels, and longer forms.
This is not so different from what, at the beginning of the 20th century and the mid
to late 20th century, many other poets were doing.
Robert Frost wrote this way.
McKay, the founding Harlem Renaissance poet, wrote this way, Auden.
So I'm just going to let you know that group exists.
But that's not what I'm going to focus on.
Because modernism is often seen as a break with the past.
Both a formal break, though I don't think it applies as much to that particular team.
But also a break in thematic, a break in subject matter, and a break in approach to theme,
both modality and theme.
So what we see in a lot of contemporary poems is radical subjectivity or radical objectivity
or fragmentation or an emphasis on alienation, displacement.
These are themes that define our era in poetry.
And in contrary distinction to that formalist school, I passed out a sheet that you can all look at.
And I have a poem by the founding American father of modern American poetry, William Carlos Williams.
When it emphasizes middle name is Carlos, he's a Puerto Rican American poet,
also partly a Basque background, a first-generation immigrant.
That's important to know that, to understanding his work, it's important to know that.
On the right I have a poem by Archie Ammons.
This is a contemporary poem.
And you can see right away that the contemporary poem owes something or a lot to the William Carlos Williams poem
of much earlier close to a century ago.
So this is the group.
I would put not only William Carlos Williams in this group, but also Gertrude Stein.
And I'm going to define this group as the local American modernist group,
as opposed to the formalist traditional group.
And I thought, just start us off, why don't I just start us off by having us look at these poems
so that we can get a feeling of understanding.
So a lot of you know this poem, the Red Wheelbarrow.
How many people have seen this before?
How many people have heard of it?
Okay, a lot of us have.
How many people are still baffled by it?
Don't necessarily understand it, right?
Let me read it to you.
The Red Wheelbarrow, and this is from a much larger work that is multi-genre
and contains a lot of prose and criticism as well, all mixed together.
So much depends upon a Red Wheelbarrow, glazed with rain, water,
beside the white chickens, end of poem.
And some people are perplexed by it nevertheless because it's not an exclamation.
So much depends upon ex exclamation point.
It's not a complex sentence that has a dependent clause in it.
So much depends upon ex that y.
It just says so much depends.
And that people find a little bit agrammatical or unusual or asymmetrical.
But Williams wants that effect.
You can't, he's not writing a grammatical sentence.
And he wants to do other things like separate the word wheel from the word barrow
so that every word gets equal democratic attention.
Similarly, if you look at the contemporary poem by Ammons on the right,
the spring in her step has turned to fall.
We just are watching a woman take a step.
And we are also watching the season turn from spring to fall.
And we land on fall.
That's where the foot comes down.
The poem is the action.
The poem steers us in the direction that it is going in.
And we could talk about it all day.
You have no idea how much is going on here.
But the point I want to state is that it's not in traditional form.
It's everyday data.
It's not a regular.
It's not a lusive or aerudite.
It's attuned to the immediate.
And the politics of the poet are liberal.
I could say that these are things that apply.
These are characteristics that often apply to members of this team.
And if we look back over the past century, who are some poets and some schools of poetry
that were inspired by the local American modernists,
I would say that includes the beat poets, such as Alan Ginsburg.
And Williams even included some of Ginsburg's letters in his epic Patterson.
It would include the New York School, Kenneth Koch, John Ashbury, who was a big,
just died recently a big influence on everyone on this panel, I believe.
Or at least on their friends, Frank O'Hara.
And for example, Kenneth Koch's one of his most favorite famous poems is entitled
Variations on a Theme by William Carlos Williams.
You can see the influence just by looking at the title.
And then there's Ted Berrigan and Ansem Berrigan, if you want a contemporary poet that's still
very much influenced by the New York School.
Ergene Young.
There's also an objectivist group, Olson and Creeley, or the Black Mountain poets, they're
sometimes called, or the language poets.
And maybe we'll look in an example of language poetry in a few moments.
But that would include Charles Bernstein and Lynn Hagenian.
All of these poets claim that they love Williams.
They're not particularly fond, for instance, of T.S. Eliot, the next poet I want to talk
about.
But that Manglan poem I showed you with all the words scattered across the page, very
much influenced by Williams.
And so it doesn't really matter.
You can pick so many contemporary poets, Ellen Bass, Jane Hirschville, Manglan, they've
all been influenced by the local American modernists, William Carlos Williams and Gertrude Stein.
And their grandfather is Whitman.
So for a graphic for this talk, we're originally going to start with an image of Whitman as
the grandfather of American poetry.
But what he really is, is the grandfather of this strand of American poetry, which has
ramified this trunk that has ramified out and created many branches.
But Whitman wanted to break the back of the pentameter, and embrace people from all backgrounds
and all walks of life, and celebrate the flesh as much as the spirit.
But then there's another group, and maybe I'll mention just one or two more groups,
because I don't want to go on too long in this introduction.
And that would be the classical modernist group.
So how many people have heard of T.S. Eliot?
Okay, how many people can recite a T.S. Eliot poem by Hart?
That's a hard one.
It's hard to do.
It's harder to do than, but easier than to do with a Bernstein poem, for instance.
But if we were to look underneath what I have here at the Red Wheelbar, as a sample, Mr.
Eliot's Sunday morning service.
Without even reading the poem, you'll see the first word is polyphyloprogenitive.
No word is too difficult for Eliot.
In other words, it wants to make poetry difficult, and it's deliberate.
My students sometimes look for that word in Greek and Latin dictionaries, and they don't
find it, because it's not there.
Eliot made the word up.
It means something like loving to produce much offspring.
It has to do with the fertilization of eggs.
It has to do with chickens in this sense, and I think we could compare it to the chicken
poem by William Carlos Williams.
And without reading the entire poem, the sapient settlers of the Lord, those would be the learned
it sells people of religion.
In the beginning was the word, in the beginning was the word, superfitation of tohen.
That's a word in Greek that suddenly appears in the middle of his poem, and what he's talking
about is how the learned it sells people of religion, theologians like Origen mentioned
in the last line there who castrated himself to bring himself closer to God.
Their enterprise is completely futile, because their work, the proliferation of interpretations
they offer us, do not bring everyday people closer to the divine.
And in that sense, Eliot's frustrated that the erudition and subtlety of these great
thinkers is futile, and perhaps Eliot's own poem might be futile if he's trying to reach
a deeper truth.
And he was.
With Ezra Pound, he formed a group of classical modernists who did not like conservatism.
They did not necessarily want to preserve 19th century traditions.
They wanted to reach back to something more titanic than rationalism, or then market economies,
or then perfunctory practices of Christian rituals.
They wanted to reach back to a renaissance of the Renaissance, the rebirth of the great
rebirth of classical antiquity, and everything it signified for them.
So they set the bar at high in terms of their erudition, and what they were seeking spiritually.
And in their Eurocentric attitude that they were seeking to embody what is best in the
mind of Europe, they believed that Europe had a mind.
And Williams rejected all of this.
He felt the poetry is not sacred.
Poetry does not have a philosophical mission like this.
It's not a regular.
All those things I said about Williams, Williams hated Elliot.
Elliot did not think much of Williams.
Williams loved Stein, pounded Elliot work together.
And you would think that Elliot wouldn't have many incarnations today, but I gave an example
on the right of the contemporary poem Shiloh Church.
And you can see right in the second line we get, plan Vistas milky with Jehovah's Calm,
so an invocation of the biblical Lord.
And it ends with the line in deserts, drop the odd white turds of bone, which is not a
good omen.
And basically this poet is suggesting that even those who were sacrificing themselves
for the noble cause of ending slavery committed great slaughter and therefore believed that
they were unredeemable.
And so there's a great, or might not be redeemed or that they were sinful.
And there's the same sense of futility and historicism and high language in this poem
that we find in the Elliot poem.
But these are not the only heirs of Elliot.
And so what I want to suggest is that Elliot and Williams, if you put them together, if
you take Elliot's classicism or at least his architecture and you combine it with Williams'
local belief in local modernism, you get other groups of poets like the American Sublime,
the Heart Crane, Wallace Stevens group, or the Confessional Poets, the Lowell and Plath
and Sexton and Varyman, and I thought maybe I'd give you a couple of examples, one example
of a Confessional poem and then I would pretty much end the talk there.
But we have this one by Sylvia Plath, Lady Lazarus.
Actually put it next to this line from Elliot in Prufrock, I am Lazarus.
Come back from the dead.
Come back to tell you all.
I shall tell you all.
There's another side to Elliot to balance their tradition.
He often includes his own anguish or expressions of his own anguish in his work.
And Confessional poets like Elliot in the Wasteland in this moment describes under that his wife
having a nervous breakdown.
My nerves are bad tonight.
Yes, bad.
Stay with me.
Speak to me.
And that passage ends with I think we are in Rat's Alley where the dead men lost their
bones.
So you can see the influence on the hill poem, the contemporary poem, but you can also see
that Elliot is talking about a problem in his marriage, about a mental breakdown, about
his wife's nervous breakdown.
And she did end up in an asylum.
And Elliot finished the Wasteland while making clay pots in a sanatorium.
And he lets you know it in the poem.
That's why his influence is so great because a lot of poets in the late 20th century and
21st century are interested in revealing intimate details about themselves in their
poems.
So this poem by Sylvia Plath for example, in it she describes a suicide attempt or
multiple suicide attempts.
The second time I meant to last it out and not come back at all, I rocked shut as a seashell.
They had to call and call and pick the worms off me like sticky pearls.
Dying is an art like everything else.
I do it exceptionally well.
I do it so it feels like hell.
I do it so it feels real.
I guess you could say I have a call.
And then she did take her own life.
So she's revealing how she feels.
And Sexton took up poetry when her analyst suggested that it might be cathartic for her.
It might be a way for her to deal with her postpartum depression.
I also included here we don't have time to talk about it.
In the lower left corner of Franz Wright poem, contemporary poet writing in the Confessional
mode.
And on the next page poems by Tracy K. Smith and Ocean Bong, which I don't think are as
raw and intense as the Plath poem, but are still in the Confessional mode.
So Sharon Olds, there are many contemporary poets writing in this mode.
And other groups that I don't really have time to talk about right now would include
the postcolonial poets, Derek Walcott and Company.
Or what do you think, for instance, of erasure poems?
Is that a new kind of poetry?
Or is that just a tool or a technique that poets use to inspire them?
What about slam poetry, a new econ poetry?
Maybe some of you have heard of that.
Heavily influenced by the beat poets, but that's another possible group we could talk
about.
What about what's happening on the internet today?
Tumbler poetry.
Is that a good enough platform for poetry?
What do people think about conceptual poetry?
Maybe Anne Marie or others on the panel could explain what that's about some more.
But the point I might end with is that I didn't really have time to talk about Walcott the
way I wanted to, but there is also a multicultural postcolonial strand.
And I want to suggest that poetry today is much more diverse.
So the few strands I gave you merge and some poets are hybrid and there are a lot more
women poets and there used to be a lot more openly gay poets and lesbian poets.
So poets from Whitman to Ashbury were gay, but they didn't always write about that directly.
A lot more recent immigrant poets or poets who write about their background and so forth
and so on.
So maybe that's one place to look for the difference.
And I thought I would just open this up to the panel.
Do people on the panel agree with this schema, with this map, or where do we want to take
it from here?
So.
Yes.
And I'm going to supplement Stephen's remarks.
I'm going to give you the Twitter version of where we've come from and where we are
now.
And I'm very glad to look at these because these are examples of a lot of what's happened.
American poetry today, we are very lucky to be readers of it, which brings me to the question
and do not be embarrassed by this.
How many of you actually read poetry regularly?
Most people do not.
Oh, that's wonderful.
And a much bigger proportion than usual because usually today people remember poetry from
college or they'll see a couple of poems in the New Yorker.
They're not really conversant with it.
But American poetry is definitely the most diverse energetic poetry in the English-speaking
world today.
How did we get here?
That's what I'm going to talk about briefly.
American poetry has always been marked by improvisation and very idiosyncratic invention,
especially when we finally turn finally away from European models and from overvaluing
all things European in the arts.
In this century, the 21st, our poetry is fully, finally, triumphantly American.
What does that mean?
To better understand where we are now, we can look at where we've been.
And here comes the Twitter version of it.
American poetry has a forefather, Walt Whitman.
And it has a foremother, Emily Dickinson.
And in some sense, all later developments point to one or another of these wildly different,
wildly idiosyncratic poets.
They invented kinds of poetry the world hadn't seen before, which is still going on.
And they also invented themselves.
The invention of the self is a very American undertaking.
And I would argue at the heart of what's happening in poetry right now.
A good place to start in recent times, and this is supplementing or complimenting what
Stephen said, start with the 1950s, marked by beat poetry, Ginsburg, and a competing formalism,
very traditional poems, meter and rhyme.
Think of Alan Ginsburg, whom I'm sure most of you have heard of, and Richard Wilbur, who
really until 96, still going strong.
In the late 50s and the early 60s, confessional poetry dominated as the new thing.
And you notice this again as the self.
But I would want to say that even when it purports to be your actual self, talking about
what's going on in your life, it isn't.
It's a linguistic creation of a self that speaks in the poem.
Think of Ansexton, Robert Lowell, Sylvia Plath, some of the people that Stephen mentioned.
Oh, well, I hope that's not the first time.
Here it is, in the late 60s and in the 1970s, language poetry arrives on the scene.
And this is an avant-garde movement that's generated instant heated controversy.
Traditionally, which I mean hundreds of years, a lyric poem was marked specifically by the
creation of a single, stable speaking voice, and a poem that was led by the author to a
certain conclusion, in other words, closure.
Practitioners and theorists of language poetry insisted no.
Language is speaking itself in any given poem.
There is no stable single self or speaker.
And a reader has to step in to create and make meaning out of a poem.
No one authorial voice controls meaning in a poem.
I think this is the most significant thing that happened in this very brief history.
This poem also raises closure, bringing you to the neat end you'll be familiar with in
any traditional poem.
Instead, a poem is a process and it stays open-ended.
These poetry wars raged for decades and they were heated.
Uptown mainstream traditional versus downtown, experimental, innovative, resisting belief
in a single self and in the authorial imposition of meaning.
And you can think of the movements really geographically as centered Uptown, 92nd Street
High, downtown, St. Mark's, and the poetry project.
But what happened is that where we are now is that gradually poets writing simply took
devices from every point on the poetic spectrum, a lot of which Stephen has touched on.
So what were once bitterly thought and contested ideological matters simply were co-opted as
techniques that a poet would deploy to expand his or her expressive range, which is very
much what I do and almost everyone I know does.
For example, collage, fragmentation, multiple voices speaking within a poem, disjunctive
development, great big leaps from one thing to another, and very quick shifts of tone
and speech registers.
The distinctivity of distinctions between high culture and popular culture.
So you could say no more Uptown or downtown, everybody's gone to Brooklyn, which is where
we are now geographically.
I'll say a couple more things.
External conditions have radically impacted poetry today and one very important development
in my opinion is the diminished influence of the gatekeepers.
I don't want to put a particular, what I'd say the last 10, 20 years, to get your poems
into publication you would pass through an elaborate series of people who put their imprement
to her on yes, this is worthy of publication.
But recently, journals and presses have proliferated and the web provides another very far-reaching
and very different means of disseminating poems, which I'm happy polo is going to talk about.
Which though certainly not all of the most interesting work in poetry is coming out of
small independent presses.
And there's no one kind of poetry that predobinates it, Stephen's also indicated.
An anecdote here a few years ago, the National Book Awards, the five finalists for poetry
were all from tiny little barely known presses, which understandably annoyed the more commercial
and mainstream presses who after all as they pointed out were funding these awards.
So that mistake got corrected in the next series of national poetry awards.
At this moment, I conclude there is no center in American poetry, but at any given moment,
one or another of these many strands you mentioned tend to be highlighted or spotlighted.
So right now for example, we're hearing more from traditionally underrepresented voices.
Here's an example.
Besides Frank B. Dar who won the National Poetry Award this year, two of the four finalists
drew on their experiences, African-Americans, and the third drew on her experience as a Lakota
Indian, Native American.
The other big thing that I notice and you'll all notice is as you'd expect there's an outpouring
of poems responding politically to the dire situation, the country and in fact the world
is finding itself in.
I'm struck by the melding of political response with intense lyricism, which is something new
in political or social response poetry.
Ocean Vuon, you have an example there, his new book, his only book, Night Sky with Exit
Wounds is an example of this.
He is a Vietnamese-born refugee, but there is no center now and no one kind or kinds of
poems that predominate.
It's good that there's no center.
I agree.
One way in which you evaluate any country or any time period in literature is to go to
see who's publishing these particular writers.
For the poets especially, the literary journal, literary review, literary magazine however
you call it, whether in print or online and if online, whether it also involves audio,
that's there may be hundreds, probably more than a thousand literary journals and they're
not all doing the same thing.
There is going to be some overlap on what people consider to be good poetry.
It will, in what Patricia and Stephen have talked about, they will be representing certain
kinds of poetry, styles of poetry, certain modes, whether it's formal or not.
But I think there's a kind of poetry for every kind of person.
Unfortunately, schools where we get poetry from the beginning don't represent the wide
variety of poems available that people are writing.
Literary journals are the means by which poets get read.
There should be wider reading of the literary journals but online there's a wider readership.
It takes a long time to put together a collection of poetry as a book.
So the magazines support writers and give them readers.
They're stepping stones in some cases, some smaller magazines read the larger magazines.
But one thing that they do represent is all the different subjects that you could be writing
about.
Surfing, beekeeping, art, science, math, money.
No matter who you are, if you have an ability to write about something in the form of a
poem, a poem can be a form of communication, a way to almost a different kind of language
by which to talk about something.
And it is also its own form.
But so while there are many general interest literary journals, Barrow Street would be
one, Kenyan review, Agni, all of those that are in essence interested in whatever you
may want to send them if you write in the way that they deem is good poetry.
There are lots of magazines that want very specific subjects.
I don't know.
That's an anthology on food.
But there's a specific magazine called Alimentum, who's the publisher is a chef and a poet.
And they take poetry and fiction and nonfiction about food.
But the food verse contest out of literal latte is also an option.
I have a huge number of my own poems in this book so we don't even know if it's an anthology
or a book of recipes.
But this is what we can do today.
There doesn't necessarily have to be.
The rules are there are lots of ways to blur boundaries.
And there are lots of points I could pick up but I'll let you finish.
Yes.
And I would just want to mention that there's a poet laureate of the Union Square Green
Market.
There is a perfect example.
There's never anything that you can't write about or some post you can't have in poetry.
And for the time there are two off the bat that I can think of literary journals focused
on work and being out of work.
There's one called Draft Horse.
And there's one called Work.
That's an online magazine.
And they have a very nondescript white sort of background so that if you want to read
it at work and look like you're just looking at it, not looking at a magazine.
But these are like any kind of work, blue collar, white collar, pink collar, sex work,
volunteer, anything they say.
There's Jay Journal, which is out of the John Jay School of Criminal Justice.
And they want justice, just the letter J. There's the five two crime poetry weekly.
And there's politics and ends up in most successfully and everywhere.
But new verse news, the Boston Review, which is a magazine that doesn't have to take poetry
on politics but has a focus overall in the magazine on progressive politics.
There's pop culture and is wanted by many magazines, but it's all that barrel house
wants.
Everything, poetry fiction, nonfiction, if it doesn't have pop culture, send it elsewhere
they say.
But Gargoyle, they like history and subculture and culture and pop culture.
The largest areas now are the health injury illness death as represented in these magazines
that come out of medical universities by and large.
There's Bellevue Literary Review, which is actually out of NYU Medical.
These are edited by doctors and nurses who may also be writers as well as some writers
who are not in the medical fields.
They want, that magazine tends to, so they ushered in this idea, but there are now, that
I've counted 29 that come out of medical universities.
There's the Healing Muse up in one of the SUNY colleges bioethics.
They like a little more of a lyric poem than a narrative poem that Bellevue likes.
And then there's hospital drive down in Virginia.
There's one that's not associated with a medical program, Recovery, which is an online magazine.
They spell it rk.v.ry.
That's all for definition, well, among the, write something about, from one of the four
definitions of recovery, which can include also obtaining usable resources from unusable
sources, but it can also be recovery that isn't successful.
You can write along a wide range of health and injury related subjects.
And then the other big area is the nature environment ecology place.
And if you, if you just want to write about the pleasure of nature and human interaction,
Snowy Eagret is one, maybe eco tone.
And if you want to write about the ecology, there's poecology, there's a precipitate journal
and avel set and about place that are interested in the more environmental, the loss of nature
rather than the pleasures of nature.
And I don't know, there's step away magazine if you want to write about neighborhoods.
There's just everything out there.
That's a start.
There's so much more I would say.
But you know, and it goes into books, of course.
There's one of my favorite more recent books is by Nick Lance.
It's called We Don't Know We Don't Know.
And he uses either Pliny the Elder or Donald Rumsfeld quotes.
So the We Don't Know We Don't Know is a Donald Rumsfeld quote.
And he uses elliptical, elliptical quality of those statements in poems about very serious
things as well as humor.
So even if we're just talking about poems about nature and place, I can think of a few
more like terrain.org is just about the environment built or natural.
And there are others like Appalachia people are going camping and want to read a poem when
they're learning how to make a tent.
So what Amy's suggesting is just the diversity and the range of subject matter that is sometimes
a revelation to people.
But to also speak to a point that, and I think that Paolo's going to want to pick up a little
bit on the point about the homogenization in education or something like, no, okay,
not necessarily.
Okay, but I think I first want to pick up on the point that Patricia raised about
the fragmentation of voices in contemporary poetry.
And I was going to ask, how would we make a distinction then between, because there's
one thing that I tried to point out is that we can draw a line from poets earlier in the
modern era to poets who are contemporary.
It seems that as soon as this was happening, as soon as modernism cracked the egg, so to
speak.
And I was suggesting, kind of giving an answer, Elliot kind of wanted to put the chicken back
into the egg.
But he ends his wasteland with a pistiche of different languages.
And it's somewhat radical to a modern reader.
He called it classicism, but it can look like craziness.
The end of the wasteland goes like this.
Shall I set my lands in order?
And then the next slide is, por esas cosi ne que yafina cuando, fiam ootie keli down
oo swallow swallow.
And the plants that we tan ollato averi, these fragments I have short against my ruins.
London Bridge is falling down, falling down, falling down.
Why then I'll fit you.
Hirani Mo is mad again.
Datta, dham yatta, di yadvam.
Chantish, shantish, shantish.
So that's Elliot's version of classicism.
But to us it might sound like craziness.
More poets today in their embrace of different voices in different languages doing something
different from what Elliot is doing.
Well, I think what Elliot is doing in that sense is formal and technical.
It's a tissue of voices.
But I also want to suggest that Elliot had a pretense of objectivity in that he's writing
about a disarray and a dissolution of Western civilization.
But more and more when people read Elliot, it's pretty clear he's talking about his own
psyche.
And this is far more personal poetry than Elliot would ever have acknowledged.
In fact, almost all of Elliot's notes and essays, and he's not alone among poets in doing this.
Most poets develop anesthetics or a poetics that happens to be what they're doing.
And he was no exception to that.
In his view, you couldn't be subjective.
You had to be objective, but almost everything he does is subjective.
Here is what I would say about Elliot.
The difference between Elliot and what happened in what I consider to be current happens in
that fault line when you move to language poetry.
And it's very connected.
I don't know how many of you remember the 70s or have read about?
They're intensely theoretical.
That's where I may add importation mostly of European ideologies.
Again, it's not really American.
And that's what the cracking of the self is coming from.
And where I would draw the fault line is really in a self-conception of the self.
I think that what happened is people, both culturally and ideologically, lost the sense
that they were one person.
And now that doesn't mean there aren't people writing eye poems.
Of course, there are.
It's a lyric.
I did this.
I love this one.
I feel this way.
But it's a constructed eye.
And a stable self has simply dropped out of the equation.
And that's where I would draw the distinction.
That wouldn't have been something that Elliot himself writing about would have acknowledged
or any of the other people.
So I would draw it.
Modernism is considered to be the cracking and destruction of the past.
Postmodernism is considered to be a return to that, but in an ironic way.
And I would want to suggest that what's happening now is really something different.
And then it's back to that conception and reinvention of a multiple self.
If you look, actually, if you think about yourself for a minute, aren't you kind of
one person on Monday at four and another person Thursday at seven?
And it's that sensibility that I think has crept across all of these different schools.
And the one other thing I want to say is I think that we are, which is helpful, all
of us, dividing poems and poets into schools and into movements.
But when you come right down to it, every strong poet is a school of one.
And these groups that we all do, that I did it myself, they're birds eye or schematic
maps.
But like a map, you know, if you get right down on the ground, an area that looks as
if you could group it.
No, there's a rock here.
There's a pond here.
And they are, in fact, quite individual and idiosyncratic.
That would be my long answer to your somewhat short question.
Right.
So we went from a time where people, especially those with a Eurocentric leaning, were having
a crisis of faith.
And they're representing a kind of trauma.
Also associated with, you know, became a kind of trauma that a lot more people could relate
to once World War I hit and so forth.
And, you know, people asked if civilization was moving backwards as we just developed
greater weapons and greater ways of creating mass destruction and so forth.
So there's a lot of trauma that underlies the fragmentation and even the fragmentation
of voices.
But what I think Patricia is saying is people, you know, across the modern era, writers and
artists learned to also embrace the fragmentation and to see it as an expression of just ones.
Well, think of it the way the Buddhists will say that there is no self that once fundamental
humanity depends on not being attached to that ego.
There's a tortured quality to some who let go of that ego and others celebrate that.
And I think the ones that celebrate it more are more influenced by that local American
modernist group.
The fragmentation in Williams is very different from the fragmentation in Eliot.
But I thought I'd give an example.
I have this poem by Charles Bernstein.
Just a fragment.
And again, you know, the, well, this is, he sometimes categorizes a language poet and
they trace their influence to new school poets who loved Williams.
But take this harrow off my chest.
I don't feel it anymore.
It's getting stark to stark to see.
I feel I'm barking at hell's spores, the new sentence.
What is the eye in that poem?
Is that the speaker or is that coming out of a Bob Dylan song?
Or have I just given too much away?
But you know, there's a way in which the part of the language is appropriated as earlier
modernists.
Eliot Pound appropriated a lot of foreign languages and even whole lines from other
texts into their work.
But here it's much more playful.
I don't think he's making some grand statement about civilization.
And it's a medium for play.
I'm barking at hell's spores, hell's spores, heaven's door.
The words correspond and yet we're almost saying the opposite.
But we're not really talking about hell the way a confessional poet would.
I wanted to say I think actually this poem is about language poetry.
The new sentence is a very influential book, criticism written by Ron Siliman.
Yes.
Right.
And Charles Bernstein is based in the East Coast and the term language poetry is an arbitrary
designation for a group of poets primarily in the Bay Area, some in the East Coast, who
were reading marks very deeply and considering capital and its relation to language.
And in the new sentence, Ron Siliman, he's exploring and I'm just generalizing here because
he explores a lot.
Parataxis, you have syntax where you have word order, right, determining meaning, then
you have hypotaxis, which is the kind of sentence that James Baldwin was great at, a lot of subordinate
clauses.
And they have parataxis, which I think ancient Greek is in, where you don't really know
every word isn't in its rightful order.
And so that opens up meaning.
And Gertrude Stein is considered to be still even a limit for language writing and a goddess
and a god for language writers because her writing truly desenters, opens up the English
sentence and maybe open as a euphemism, right, destroys it, right?
And that has everything to do with her growing up hearing and speaking four languages, being
queer, Jewish and occupied France, living in France as an American, right?
And really writing at midnight till six in the morning, right, when everyone's asleep,
right?
And so your brain is not really paying much attention to word order at that time, right?
But she embraced that negative capability.
So I think also with Charles Bernstein, who I know personally, he's also interested in
the tradition of Jewish comics coming out of the Catskills.
And so there's a playfulness that is very specific to his work that you will not find
in other language poets.
But I'm so glad you mentioned playfulness, no quote.
And so did Stephen.
I didn't mean, please go on.
Oh, okay.
I just wanted to add my two cents.
I don't have an elaborate outline prepared.
I just want to say in terms of how I see poetry being different today, there's a lot more
diversity, right?
And by diversity, I mean, you have a lot of poets of color with first books, a lot of
well, the last 35 years, I think there have been more female poets being published.
But now you have a lot of poets of color, a lot more women poets, a lot of GLBT poets,
a lot of trans poets were not just coming out with collections, but gaining visibility
because their books are actually being given awards.
I think the first book of trans poetry came up, came out two years ago, published by Night
Poet Books, which published my last full collection.
And you actually see poetry bestsellers.
Claudia Rankine, who has a background in experimental poetry, she published Citizen, which has sold
an astonishing number of copies, right?
So maybe that also speaks to the moment that we're in that's unique, where we are dealing
with social, right, in a way that we haven't before because of the mediums that are disposal
to engage with it, right?
So you have Rupi Karr, I don't know if you've read Rupi Karr, K-A-U-R, she's from Toronto,
she's South Asian Canadian.
She was publishing her poetry on Tumblr, I believe, and a mass or Instagram, and a mass
like a following of two million followers, and she's published three books of poems that
are bestsellers, number one on Amazon, everywhere, right?
And you couldn't see more diverse aesthetics in these two best-selling poets, right?
They have a very popular populist poet and Rupi Karr, and then you have Claudia Rankine,
whose work is challenging, right?
I also wanted to say perhaps these sensations are also made possible because of social media.
I don't think Claudia Rankine has a very palpable digital footprint, but certainly her press
does.
Most poetry publishers, let's bear in mind, like most of us poets are published by small
presses, it's a gift economy, right?
But let me correct that by saying their poets were making a lot of money these days, and
they have careers, right?
But social media, you get on YouTube, you get on Instagram, you know, Lin-Manuel Miranda
was in the White House dropped that Hamilton piece, and that was it, right?
I mean, it's more than that, he worked his butt off for that and it was a build up, but
yeah, social media can really give you a visibility and then an agency that poets 10 years ago
couldn't enjoy, right?
Now having said that, and I mentioned poets have careers now, there's a professionalization
of poetry, right?
Like you have career tracks as a poet.
Poets have agents now, right?
They do, like they have agencies, there are three big agencies now.
If you want a book of poets, you got to talk to their agent, right?
That's relatively new, right?
They used to be exclusive to folks' big names, you know?
But now it's not so exclusive, folks with first books that make a mark digitally, they
had agents, right?
And that's also, I think, a phenomenon made possible because of rise in prominence and
prevalence of the MFA.
MFA programs, right?
That's a master of fine arts, so creative writing programs, which we're not nearly so
numerous even a few decades ago as they are now.
Now every university and community college has one, right?
So probably you seem to be saying that it's something of a mixed bag that there might
be poets that we've heard of like Rupi Kaur, but at the same time you're saying that
that getting known might depend on the internet or depend on how a press promotes the work.
And yet to take the Rupi Kaur example then to write in a way that's suitable for an
Instagram post, you have to write really short poems that would appeal to everyone, and you
might actually sell over a million books between one and two million books when you put them
together in a book, but is this really the way to construct the best poems, is online
construct?
Because I mean, poesis, the Greek word means a made thing.
Is there enough of an artifact there or enough agency on the part of the poet?
Or is it a matter of pursuing what's trending or a matter of pursuing the bigger audience
as you move?
And does that take us out of the creative space that a lot of poets would want to operate
in?
And that's a question that you might be raising.
Well, I guess in terms of, I mean, there's no questioning taste, and I'm always hesitant
to sort of qualify a poet's work.
I'm always mindful of Gertrude Stein's reception.
Right.
Right.
Look, now she's undeniably one of the greats and she's still influencing poets.
But what fascinates me about Rupi Kaur is the platform that enabled her success.
Right.
Instagram.
Which is also the platform, Instagram, Twitter, you got to have a Twitter handle.
You don't have to, but that's how a lot of poets coming up are thinking.
Like they feel that it's incumbent on their career that they have a digital presence or
digital citizenship.
Get an Twitter account.
You have a nice author photo that gives you traction.
Right.
But it makes you write very short poems.
Not necessarily.
I think what's interesting then maybe for me, my question would be, well, let's talk
about that.
Like these platforms that are enabling greater visibility for poets.
And then we can talk about the poetry after.
I always am mindful of the fact that myself personally, I've been Facebook free for eight
years.
12 point.
This is way before the fake news scandal.
But I was always very uncomfortable about it just because it was so distracting from writing
poem for me.
It's so hard to do that to begin with.
And so what I think my point is that you've got Tumblr, you've got Facebook, you've got
Instagram, Twitter, they're owned by billionaires.
Right.
So there's an inescapable matrix there of poetry and capital that is new but is not
discussed.
Right.
So I think as a poet, what you make your poems on now is definitely something that I think
about.
And who am I giving it to?
Not to be a paranoid or anything but I think about it because I'm going to be giving money
to, I don't want to get, you know, I can fight the power on Twitter but what's his name is
cashing it in?
A person who runs Twitter.
You're probably looking at the only two Facebook free poets in the country.
You're gathered right here.
Dead.
It's, you know, the professional, I'm thinking about it just in what's come up two things.
One is the professionalization of poetry which is actually an odd and rather modern thing.
There didn't used to be a career track but there absolutely is now complete with resumes
and credits in a mess.
That's partly because although there are some poets on the net and that's just going
to increase who can actually make money at this.
Most poets still cannot.
They're dependent on a day job and the day job has increasingly been in the university
which has also had an effect on the poetry.
It's a cyclical feedback kind of thing I think.
And then the second part of that that I wouldn't want to lose is play which you brought up
and which Paolo brought up.
You can forget about all of this that the purpose of poetry is pleasure and the way to
read a poem is to immerse yourself and experience the poem and you mentioned negative capability
and it was Keats thing about poetry is ruined for many people.
I'm happy that I read it way before I ever got any of it in school.
It's taken into school and what is this poem saying?
No, that's not what poems are doing.
What they're doing is setting forth something in a dance with the language that creates
pleasure, play and the meaning of the experience which you will only feel if you let yourself
experience it.
So as though we're trying to map it here we all know and you all know too that's really
not the poetry escapes that and it's not where it should be.
It's only a useful way of doing it.
I don't know what's going to happen.
I still don't, when you look at the history of poetry which I tend to take a long view
of, really a very long view of, going back actually a couple thousand years, what survives?
What survives of people's poems at the most is a handful of really good poems and I think
that's going to be the same thing.
That isn't to say that I don't have a negative or positive view of what's going on now.
It's one way of disseminating it.
Claudia ranking to me is a superb poet.
I really love her work.
And what she did in her book particularly called Don't Let Me Be Lonely is she put all
kinds of logos and things from newspapers and all kinds to give you the felt sense.
What is it like?
What does it feel like to be an American at this moment?
I really don't know any book that does it as well.
That's what poetry can do.
But the other thing I'd say is that Keats referred to poets as possessing negative capability
which is the ability to take something in without he said any irritable reaching after
reason.
I would want to suggest that that's not about poets.
That's about the way everybody should be reading poems.
You should look at your own response first.
And then you can say afterward, well what in this poem gave me that response?
And the last thing I'd say is about poetry always pulling two ways.
It's language so it may look more intellectual to people than it in fact is.
But it's words on a page and in one way they're pulling toward meaning but in the other way
they're pulling toward sheer play, tending toward music and that's where you see Stephen's
great examples.
Even look at the Bernstein, look what he's doing with rhyme in there.
W.H.
Auden when he was judging the Yale series, Younger Poets, he said and he also edited a book called
Good Bad Poetry which was just a whole lot of things, Ogden Nash kinds of things and
liberal kinds of things and he said, I have much more confidence in a poet who is just
playing around with everything.
Reverse of it than I do in anybody who is more purportedly serious.
So that would be my take on this phenomenon and I like Paolo have no idea what's going
to happen now that you can sell a million copies of something.
I still think a handful of poems are going to survive of anybody's.
Well, it is very hard to know the trajectory of something that's very big at one time
might not be so significant later.
To take an example from England, we went back a hundred years, the most renowned poet would
be Robert Bridges poet laureate of England and an unknown poet who he was actually aware
of but nobody knew who he was was, Dr. Anli Hopkins.
Hopkins was published, he died in his 40s, was published after his death and if you look
at anthologies, there is some point where Robert Bridges disappears and Hopkins becomes
because he invented his own language, becomes the forebear of a whole, you know, talk about
play, you know, a dappled, dawn drawn falcon.
Is that a falcon drawn by the dawn or is that a falcon drawn like a picture in the dawn
or is the dawn drawing the falcon?
He just created compound complex words that no one had ever seen before in language combinations
and I think there are poets now doing them just to talk about play so I'm segging into
this comment on play, you know, like Bill Nott who invented his own language or Joan
Houlahan, I mean, most people don't know who they are because people really want narrative
very often.
That's something they can get right into but those poets are not all that well known necessarily
but they might end up being much more important in the long run and so it takes a while for
all these things to sort out to talk about reception.
Well, I want to also add in about play and also about the platform and back to the editors,
the more curious and flexible editors of magazines is that if you do, there are Twitter, there
are a lot of magazine editors who are on Twitter and they, and so if you're a poet, you can
find out about things and they post when poems are published but they also have Twitter-specific
contests and little things.
So you're writing these tiny things.
So maybe it's not what you're going to do all the time but it's another way in which
to play and be confined by something and then to create within a form which is part of what
poetry does and other platforms are like that.
Well, Iku and perfect that.
Well, yes, they do have specific Iku ones but they also have other kinds of poems and
then you can also do it with us as we know a series of tweets can create a poem.
You don't have to, just like it can be a rant.
So I would say that the language is first, I agree, in a poem and just what that language
is matters to a whole lot of different people in a whole lot of different ways.
So, yes.
Well, one would think, I mean, Natasha Saye asked Campbell McGrath who does really interesting
work with pop culture and so forth but that makes political statements.
What do you think of Twitter approaches over?
He said it seems like now because we have these short-form platforms that would be perfect
for haikus and everyone would be writing great haikus but that's not really happening and
perhaps because it's all disposable.
It's a disposable context and people don't really want to stop and think about a poem
all day, they want to keep swiping.
And poetry really requires sustained attention.
The play is play but it takes a while to sink in and it's a very kind of artful chaos even
when it looks chaotic.
For example, if we look at the Gertrude Steinpung which strikes me, I put it next to the Bernstein
poem because it's also based on music.
People will look at it and see sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet tea, Susie
Asato, sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet tea, Susie Asato.
First of all, it sounds good so we're already, there are things we like to say like when
Wallace Stevens says, be, be, finale of scene, you just want to keep saying that and I think
that's part of the appeal.
So, I realize that Susie Asato is a flamenco dancer and she's imitating, I wouldn't say
imitating because she's not a representative poet, she's embodying the sound of the flamenco
dance.
And I wish I could stand up and dance a little bit but it's like, sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet,
sweet, tea, Susie Asato.
So the language is its own music and then if you look at the syntax, there's no one
more radical today, Susie Asato is a told trayshore, a lean on the shoe, this means slip slips
hers, it's completely ungrammatical but people will even look at told trayshore and they'll
see a tray there and maybe the tea could go on a tray and that would be domestic calm
that could contrast with the passion of the flamenco dancer or maybe trayshore is T.R.
E.S., S.U.R.E. like the French word Tleisue or maybe it's treasure like something we really
value.
And the opportunity to just play with words and associations is great and yet she didn't
want us to as say a confessional poet like Plath or a poet like Elliot might have wanted
to say, you know, I think we are in Vat Sali where the dead men lost their bones, you say
Vat Sali could be the trenches of World War I, you're comparing the breakup in your marriage
to world, to a battle and she didn't want to do that, she wanted to get the words clean,
to wipe them free of the associations with which you come to them and you know it's
striking to see how much the language poets can resemble a poet who really just founded
the movement you know much earlier in the modernist era.
So but Stein actually was trying to be a bestseller, right?
She wrote books that she would like be on the way out of Vat Sali, to make money and be
a bestseller.
She became the bestseller.
But she felt bad about it.
She planned it right like this, but she couldn't get published.
But you know what she never was accepted as much in the you know in the ivory tower and
you can find this you know with the poet, there are those who are accepted more in that
kind of, it's the way the beat poets had a hard time getting accepted as establishment
writers, they were viewed as activists who just, the way perhaps their followers of the
New Yorkan poets today and slam poetry.
And some of it is not good, I mean we have to admit because it's poetry for everybody,
but some of it you know is based on written poems that are actually, that's why I put
a slam poem next to a Ginsburg poem so you can see the you know really it's obviously
coming out of Ginsburg.
But people are still writing like this, I'm not going to read it to you, but it's very
political as Ginsburg was and as Whitman was.
Different kinds of political you don't have to be, you know like the social issues are
a political way of you could write about violence, you could write about not being able to find
a job, you could write about all kinds of social issues and be in a in a in some way
or have a social conscious without it being the upper politics of you know what's happening
in the presidential office.
There are all kinds of politics and then there's a and then you can have it almost
back rounded in a poem, you can you know they're all different ways and again lots of bissat
and you mention New Yorkan because another way in which poets are supported in by support
not just you know being heard, having their poems heard is by giving readings or performances
of their work and that's another, there's a set of people who are running regular reading
series around any, around the country in any city and in suburbia to libraries, cafes,
bars, universities, literary centers and those people are also flexible in who they present
and it's up to the audiences just as it's up to the readers to help determine who should
be, who should continue really being heard and part of what everybody loved Gertrude
Stein was because she was so different, they liked that they didn't, she didn't make the
ivory tower certainly once it came after.
But they were just what they wanted.
They wouldn't publish this stuff, they she had no idea.
No, the later people loved her.
But even so apparently in an archive of Yale there's a thousand pages of unclamat writing.
I think how much poets loved her now.
The poets based on self.
We forget because we you know we edit when we look back at history, we forget how radical
and how maligned she might have been in certain circles and that's what I'm saying but it
is tricky because there are, you know you go to some open night night and people are
reading off you know cocktail napkins and a lot of it is just awful and that could be
true of a lot of slam poetry but if it's a gateway drug that brings people into the art
form maybe that's all that matters sometimes.
But there are lots of people who believe that yes in performance writing that it really
ought to work on the page or be more about this so you know there is good and bad in
every yeah and we know that the more that we are immersed in our own field there's
always the good and the bad.
The poets used to have it all.
I mean there was the Iliad and then you know two millennia later there was war in peace
and it all the popular genre became the novel and so a lot of questions that what poet struggle
with is how to reach that audience without you know because we don't want to say what
reaches a bigger audience is better or that what's even what's more moral is better.
I mean that seems desirable but you know maybe that's not possible maybe there could be you
know just because it's well meaning it doesn't always mean that it works as great art but
there is that challenge to try to reach out and at the same time preserve a certain amount
of integrity and I think I don't know maybe I'm just free associating what do you think.
So but at the same time I think these avant-garde movements even when they're a little bit rough
around the edges often have much more to them than people recognize at the time.
So people might have looked at that Richard Simon thought it was just drag.
I mean and now I think a lot of people reject a lot of work because they think that it's
not formal enough for them or but they also reject it because they think the opposite.
You know maybe it's to ivory tower.
So I think everything has to be taken on its own term.
I'm not sure the ivory tower in that sense really exists anymore.
I know exactly what you're talking about but that's what I meant by the gatekeepers
are gone and that has also to do with the way MFA programs have moved into the universities.
It's a feedback loop both ways.
But isn't that a kind of gatekeeper system because there are all these programs where
people are taught to write a certain way.
They can't start with the spoken word the way writers of the Iliad did and then move
on to something else.
They have to start writing short poems that follow certain criteria.
I don't really think that's true about MFA programs.
I think they get a bad rap.
I think it just depends who's teaching them.
I understand what you mean.
It does put a certain constraint around what's happening.
You know the common thought about MFA programs is they're just producing a lot of people
who are writing perfectly crafted poems, all of them a muchness and nothing really exciting.
But you know in any age there's only ever been a couple of people who were any good
and would last.
All you have to do is look at the 16th century when the sonic comes along.
I unfortunately have looked at these.
There are hundreds of these utterly forgettable sonic sequences that were extremely popular
in their own day.
And I think that's the equivalent of what's happening now.
You know we don't know till 50 or 100 years who the people are going to be that people
will still be reading.
We can't tell that now.
But I think they're there.
And I don't see formal academic rejection the way they're used to be.
They're certainly what where you wouldn't let certain things in and you would just let
the curriculum alone if you looked at it.
It's broadened in a certain way that I don't know.
I can think of a large number of poets though that talk a lot about how much rejection they're
getting and so forth.
So it's not as if there is I mean there are certain rules you're supposed to follow.
Think even about poetry books.
What if you tried to write a poetry book that you didn't put any blurbs on it and there
was nothing on the cover.
This would affect its reception.
That's the perfect.
That's the professionalization.
At the same time I think Rope Rope Kord go back to her.
She published herself.
I think she self published and then it sold so many copies on Amazon and then a big press
latched onto her.
And that's what's happened now.
So I do agree with you that the MFA is really powerful right now.
The desire to write poetry and publish a poet feeling incumbent to enroll in the MFA.
And unfortunately most MFA programs only admit 10 people per year.
So there is gatekeeping that's happening and who gets to teach in these programs.
It's sort of like connect the dots and the template for poetry that in the MFA programs
is adopted is still the traditional lyric narrative poem.
Which is a long tradition.
And so if you are writing left of center, if you are exploring performance poetry, there
are programs that would would over accept you.
But you have to do a little bit of research and perhaps the great equalizer or the great
Satan depending on who you ask is the internet where you're a reader I think you're at a
very golden age for experiencing so many different types of poems and poets more so
than ever before.
And to your point that's it.
There's another way now.
It's another instance of gatekeeping.
Gate's falling down.
No gatekeepers there.
On to the net.
To go to performance poetry for a minute because that's so important.
I mean poetry began obviously in the oral tradition.
There are no cultures ever been without poetry.
And really until very recently there were still cultures like in Yugoslavia when people
wanted to know about Homer.
They sent somebody to Yugoslavia where they were still repeating epics orally.
The tradition it's gone now but only the last like 40 years something like that.
But here's the thing about performance poetry.
I agree with Amy.
There is no kind of poetry that doesn't yield.
I think we all agree with this.
Really good instances of what it is.
It's not the kind of thing you're doing.
It's how well are you doing it.
So for performance poetry the question is if you want to translate it you may take the
position that you don't want to translate it to the printed page.
You are only about the spoken word.
But if you want to translate it then you have to put it on the printed page so that a reader
who is unaccompanied by you reading it will hear what it ought to sound like.
Which I think a number of performance poets are able to do to make that transition from
one to the other.
It's because there's also a lot of publishers publishing.
A lot of performance poets who want to be published in book form.
So it's not just that they want to remain in the performance.
No, no, I'm saying that.
Yes, I'm going along with that.
So it is hard to regain the oral tradition but this might be one way in which we're reminded
of it and that certain groups of poets are keeping the eye on what poems sound like when
they are read out loud.
And I think that really if a poem to be worth its salt it has to sound right.
Yes.
And Amy brought up readings which is a good thing.
Buildings have proliferated, it's another way of disseminating it and I noticed just
from when I used to go to readings when I was a lot younger poets read terribly.
They were almost embarrassed to be reading as if it were something that took away from
the sacredness of the page so they would read in a certain poetry voice to understand
anybody which was over-inflated and pretentious.
I opened the door to the twilight.
It was unbearable.
There's been a feedback loop where poets read much better, they write differently because
they're reading to audiences.
You know it works when you're reading a poem.
My poem's got a lot better when I started doing a lot of reading because I understood
what worked not just on a page in reading.
So I would want to add that too.
Yes.
I want to say that I actually disagree.
I think the oral tradition has never been more popular.
In fact, I'd say the most popular poetry has never been more popular if we are going
to keep an open mind and accept hip hop and rap.
Oh, that's what I say.
And it's because of hip hop and rap that we have seen tremendous diversity in terms of
young people who are taking a chance at expressing themselves and instinctively going to the
poem.
But it's actually not instinctively because they've grown up listening to this very old
tradition of poetry, oral poetry, which is, and rappers are great poets of our age.
I know I agree with that.
They're just not straight white nails.
I'm not sure what made you think I was disagreeing with that.
I'm saying the opposite.
That readings are one of the most important ways that the oral stuff is disseminated.
And I also would want to say if you look at a poem, I hope people go and read lots of
poems.
If you go look at a poem, it's ego that gets in the way when you're a grown up.
When you're a kid you hear something.
Think about the way kids parody a poem.
Remember, like a match and watch the schoolhouse burn to ashes, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah,
sort of thing.
They just look at a poem and they don't feel that they're challenged to understand it.
And if you go back as an adult and you just read a poem, the best way to pick up your
poem, it's just read it aloud and listen to yourself.
And if you do that a couple times, you will understand what that poem means.
It will come into you because that's where it is.
But one thing about rap is that it is performed with instrumentation or with singing voices.
And I think that it also has a lot more followers than poetry.
I mean, we're talking the, you know, the, not just, I mean, I say it's unheard of to
sell a million poetry books, but to sell rap music, I've heard out for a song to go platinum.
It's no big deal, really.
So the question the poet's always asking themselves is how, especially in this day and age where
there are some poets just like conceptual poets that are using appropriated material and there
is no political meaning to what they're doing.
It's not about social engagement.
And right next to that, we've got other writers.
I think Powell mentioned the diversity of poetry today.
I mean, I mentioned the Harlem Renaissance.
We can draw a line from there to the Black Arts movement of Brooks and Baraka and how
activist they were in their time.
But, you know, if you go to St. Ross, you know, I don't know, Ross Gay's poem on Eric Garner,
even if he makes an important statement or a sensitive statement about that, who will
really see that?
How, except other poets.
And so it's a question we have to ask.
Is there a way to, that poets can reach out, especially this time where so many poets want
to be activists?
And I don't know if we really have a platform for doing that because poetry requires that
one not right propaganda that every line has to be, it's own, it has to undercut itself
on so many levels when I hear politicians use lines out of poetry, they almost invariably
use them incorrectly or demonstrate they don't understand the work.
But I think right now it's a very challenging time for the poets who want to be socially
engaged and want to convey their responsibility to make a difference.
Go ahead, yes.
I actually don't think so.
I think poets have always been the first to respond with language in response situations.
It's just in our culture in the United States, we don't really care as much about poets
giving voice to what we're experiencing compared to Mexico, compared to South America, where
poets actually have a voice in terms of expressing what's going on in current events.
I would argue that a lot of publishers right now, when they're publishing poets, they want
to look for poets who are engaged.
Not I do.
Yeah, but let's go back to 9-11, which is not that long ago.
How did people grieve?
Most people who don't really write poetry, their first instinct was to write poem.
I went to Union Square, so many poems, Angel Island, right?
The immigrants are denied immigration, the Chinese are non-European Americans.
I mean, they wrote poems instinctively.
I just think that it now seems to be there's greater agency for you to be a poet who is
socially engaged.
Combination of social media, combination of the visibility of poetry, and combination
of, I mean, hip-hop.
Hip-hop rap has always been about what's going on in social realm.
It seems that you also for a moment talked about poetry as therapy, which is because
it goes back to what I said about sexten.
Yeah.
But it's interesting.
On the other hand, I'm not sure that that always works because poetry and psychology
is a very big theme, but for instance, when his father James Wright found out that he
had become a poet, he said to his son, welcome to hell.
I mean, I like the saying that I like to say that a sad poet is a happy poet, but really
it is a whether poetry really works as a way to grieve.
It seems like it should be cathartic, but it also can become an obsession or a dark obsession
of sorts, and I don't know.
It's about transformation, though, of what's dark.
That's the difference, transformation through language.
It's like opera, you ask yourself, why is this pleasurable?
They're all deaf.
Yeah.
Or Shakespeare, but it is.
And because it's been transformed through the art.
The terrible view that is born.
Well, yes.
But the other thing is we're talking about terms of reaching people, which is important
in all of us who love poetry, would like poems to reach more people, but they may never.
And when you think about it in absolute numbers, they're probably because there are so many
people alive.
The tiny percentage here that are reading it or interested in it probably are more than
people who've ever lived at any other time, and it doesn't ever have to be.
Just about rap.
You're bringing that up because I grew up in New York and they are street rhythms.
And I was so struck by that I just saw Hamilton, and this is the thing.
It was completely, it wasn't a gimmick.
It was so appropriate because of the amount of, that's what I mean by American poetry,
that it finally comes into its own in this century, partly through those responses.
Because our revolution was a thrusting upward from the ground up and the city up of these
energies that couldn't be contained.
And that's what you hear in rap and hip hop.
And it's wonderful because the second act of that is a really very sad act.
It's devolved from that into politics as usual.
But there it is.
Shall we open it up?
Well, does anyone have any questions?
Good.
I think the microphone works if you...
Can I have people out speaking for you?
Okay, people behind you won't hear you.
Yeah.
I am a singer and I live in an artist's building on the west side.
And we have a group of people who have met for more than 10 years every other week, who
get together and read poetry.
We read what we've written.
We read whatever interests us.
And we always discuss it in terms of what can we know about the poet, what was going
on at the time.
And it's just been extraordinarily valuable for us as a venue for us to find out what's
universal, where we are in our growth in 10 years.
We have people in their 90s, two people in their 90s, one, two people in their 70s,
people in their 60s, people in their 30s.
We have about eight people that show up for this thing.
And the growth that we've all had by reading aloud every week, and we read poems more than
once and ask, and we're not area-dyed to say, I don't know what this means.
What do you think this?
No one's trying to be crazy about their ego with it.
It's really there for an exploration.
And I think it's the universal and necessary expression for us to experience intimacy through
writing.
And I think it's very exciting that the written word is happening on the Internet.
I have a young niece in rural Massachusetts who reads a ruby car, and she's a young woman
finding out about her own voice as a woman.
And here's a great venue for her.
And this is a kid who would never be exposed to poetry.
So I think there's a lot of hope about what's going on.
And I'm very happy to have listened.
That's nice.
So there are more avenues for people to share their work.
Yeah.
For published work to be accessible for longer to a greater number of people, there are a
lot of advantages to the online presence of poetry.
And it's 80 points out.
Even though there are downsides, of course, yes.
And Amy's pointing out those are only journals you can read, and for those of you who write,
those are the journals you can send to.
And many of them are web scenes, like the one I mentioned had a dot org at the end.
And so, yes.
Thank you.
I was very interested to hear you talk about the pleasure and the pain in poetry.
How much is known about the neurobiology of poetry, particularly in the developing brain
and in the deteriorating brain?
How much do we understand in this area?
Young children, people with neurodegenerative disease.
Well, we do know that I'm going to have very limited knowledge about this, but I do know
that play makes a difference at both ends of that, that it's very important for people
to engage and in play, not necessarily to worry about what they need to get done.
And poetry provides that.
It is a lifesaver for a lot of people who engage in that art, I think.
Well I want to give two personal anecdotes about that.
One is my publisher, one of the fellow poets in the list, had a book out that was a really
fine book of poems, but she was losing her mind.
And she was unable to function in any other way.
I don't know what this says about poets, it was a terrific book.
And the second experience I had was in a public school in Queens.
In April, the Poetry Society asked some of you have done it, I'm sure poets to go into
the public schools and teach a few classes.
So I was teaching sixth, seventh and eighth grade, which was a first.
And the sixth graders were incredibly good.
They had an instinctive sense of aesthetics, which is what may survive as in my colleague
who were nothing much else survived.
Manily.
They were wonderful, they were moving.
My husband Roy came along with me, he was struck by the same thing.
At the end of it, the principal was debriefing and I said, well I take it the sixth grade
was your advanced class and she said no, they were our special needs kids.
They were so far ahead of the other classes.
So you were probably the scientist and doctor, I leave that to you to figure out what that
means.
But I don't know if the study has been done about the effect on the synapses or if someone
has been hooked up to a bunch of sensors and then reads a poem and what parts of the brain
might have.
There was a, I didn't end up getting very far in the reading and I put it off.
But there was a book called The Midnight Disease written by a neurologist who was also a writer
trying to evaluate the brain and she referenced more than just poets but perhaps that's the
contained something of the answer.
I guess you could ask the question about creativity in general.
It doesn't have to be just language.
I mean some people like deconing the painter.
I think he has Alzheimer's or some form of dementia and I think he went right on painting
good paintings to the end.
They may have been affected by what happened to his brain but he was still a great painter.
Things like that are interesting but I don't think we really know.
I don't have anything to say about that question specifically although I suppose I should.
I'm a psychiatrist.
There's not that much research I think done on that particular topic but in general is
interested in comparing languages that's used in let's say prose where, and we Patricia
you touched on this a little bit at one point, the meaning of the message is sort of intended.
And anyway the writer intends to intend it.
They intend to make the meaning clear.
They don't always.
It sometimes spills out over.
They have messages they intend to create but that's the point of prose.
And then in poetry it seems there's an interest in pushing past, gushing past the limits of
what the words are actually meaning on the surface.
There's that sort of pushing past.
I thought that's really interesting and it raises two questions.
One relates to this gentleman's question.
So playing is a little bit of, we know animals play, right?
We know that they are rehearsing physical programs so they learn how to hunt and move
in a certain way but they do exceed whatever is improvisational.
So they're not practicing like someone might practice playing the piano where you feel
you need to meet especially with classical let's say.
Where you're trying to meet the particular notes.
They're moving around but they're also exceeding, they're being inventive and improvisational
and that's what play involves the sort of pushing past whatever the sort of the sheer
formal aspect of what the brain seems to be doing.
So that's one important thing.
But the other was to bring up the question about poetry as being changing over time as
being an evolution of the constraints on poetry.
I thought that'd be an interesting topic that just touched on briefly.
Because we talked about constraints like Twitter, somebody letters can be allowed or another
constraints whether it's professionalized, capitalized, whatever is, that's another
interesting way of looking at what's happened with poetry.
Well I think poetry does require, for a poet to write a poem, certain restraints are required
even if they're arbitrary.
So it's helpful when writing a sonnet to know what the rules are and one can decide when
to follow them, when not to.
The same would be true if I would assume if one's writing on Twitter one is a certain
number of characters and that might actually inspire creativity.
But without some constraints we know how it's like Emily Dickinson gave themselves their
own strange constraints and they invented their own rules.
And I think all of us do that to a certain degree.
And yes, I think the play starts very young.
I remember being just a child and loving the word hippopotamus and wanting to say it over
and over or showing the machine which sometimes came out as mass wing shine or whatever.
But a lot of people start off as little gertrude stimes before they lose.
Before they forget the wonder that is possible in the discovery of language whereas poets
are always trying to discover it.
And yes.
And I do think constraints are at the center of everything that poets do and poetry does.
Obviously in a traditional form somebody gives it to you.
But I think all of us and people I know I teach a workshop of actually awfully good
poets and what we're doing is setting ourselves our own constraints.
We're learning how to give ourselves our own assignments and set a constraint.
And it develops maybe as you write a poem but the constraint is what makes the poem.
I think.
I wanted to add to that.
You have poets who are actually responding to these developments in terms of the new platforms
that we're writing and poetry.
You've got Tommy Pico, Morgan Parker.
I mentioned to you, Morgan Parker has one book out.
Tommy Pico has two books out.
Tommy Pico's First Nations Native American Poet Queer came out with a book called IRL
which is an Internet term.
So he's actually embracing the language that he experiences daily.
In real time on the Internet and that's actually changing how maybe not consciously but he's
allowing it to enter into his poem.
He wrote a book called it's based on the pastoral.
But it's also like an anti-pastoral because he uses a lot of language that you don't
typically consider would be pastoral worthy.
You find on blogs, you find on Twitter.
And he's very self-aware when he's writing this long poem on nature thinking about the
pastoral.
Then go back ten years ago you had Tom Lin who teaches at New Jersey.
He came up with a, he's a conceptual poet.
He came up with the idea of poetry as boredom.
And boredom as actually being a pleasurable thing.
So he published this book called Blips Soak O1 which is fantastic.
And when you're reading his work, language is scattered all across the page like My
Army.
And he doesn't expect you to read it, read it.
Like treat it ambient.
He calls it ambient stylistics.
Why can't you engage in poetry like you do music?
You can do three chores at once while listening to Tchaikovsky and still appreciate Tchaikovsky.
Why can't it be the same thing for poetry?
So I understand if it's the poetry of boredom you're not even necessarily required to read
the poem when you read it.
You can skip a rounder.
Well you are reading it but you've got three senses right?
You've got sight, sound and then meaning.
Yes.
So you can look at the words and if you look at his book he's playing around with type
face and but you don't have to read the whole poem.
It's impossible.
It's 300 pages long.
But you can read bits of it and sip your coffee, go water the plants, take the dog out for
a walk, go back to it and appreciate it as an ambient experience.
But it's on the page.
And that's I think a response to this oral and visual environment that we were finding
ourselves immersed in 10 years ago before the success of YouTube.
We're now like you have eight windows open on the internet and you're reading the times.
I've been talking to Anne Marie too.
There's something called visual poetry which is really a branch of concrete poetry where
you arrange the words on the page to represent what your subject matters.
So I mean it actually has a long history but Anne Marie had an example of a poem about
a dog shaped like a dog.
There's one older one by E. Cummings called Grasshopper where the letters of the Grasshopper
jump across the page.
So it might seem a little gimmicky but this goes all the way back to Robert Herrick and
Herbert's Easter Wings and so forth.
There's a long tradition of representing the words visually.
That said when there was this, because you mentioned Malarm when there was a discussion
with you Malarm and Edward D'Agat.
And D'Agat said you know I've been painting so much, I'd love to write poetry, I have
so many ideas and Malarm said to him my dear D'Agat poems are not made out of ideas,
poems are made out of words.
So but then if you can arrange the words in pictures maybe poems are made out of images.
I mean images in two senses of the word, go on, yes.
I think of Borden as a kind of repressed anxiety so if it can be transformed into pleasure
that's very interesting.
I have a question.
One number of things I've been puzzling over in the course of your presentations, one in
particular and that is well wider and wider dissemination through more and more channels
and venues, engagement in social and political activity, performance in a number of ways,
and even intimacy, all phenomena of the present moment.
And at the same time Patricia you were mentioned at least twice, maybe three times, the notion
that only a handful of poems perhaps in any given era tend to last, to endure.
And I'm wondering about the sort of dialectic between these two things.
Because for example if you read, as I tend to do, a lot of poetry reviews, you often
hear the phrase so and so is the greatest poet writing in English at the present time.
Or so and so is the greatest American poet of the end of the 20th century.
Now if that's more than sure to move books at Farra Stralster Norton in these reviews,
what does that have to do with this more and more what seems like democratization of
poetry, huge diversity of poetry, and then what's the meaning of the greatest poet writing
in whatever language?
There's a clash there that I can't quite recognize.
You may well wonder about that.
I can listen to you, I'm thinking if we just collected all the blurbs on the back of poetry
books.
But here's the real situation as opposed to even 20 years ago maybe.
You would ask a list of people interested in poetry, well give me a list of the 10 most
important poets writing now.
And most of the net, there'd be a lot of overlap.
You did that now with even 10 or 20 names, there might be no overlap or maybe two or three
names.
I don't think there's exactly a contradiction in what you're saying.
I think it's again the winnowing effects of time.
I think reading the blurbs could skew that in your mind.
I think the best things reviewers can do, I really think most poetry reviews, first of
all they're hardly any which is really sad.
And secondly, the best of them don't really talk that much about poetry.
They'll give you enough of a selection from the book under review so you can judge for
yourself what you think of this book.
But most of them don't as you probably realized.
They'll talk about it.
I don't know if that answers your question.
Well the point is it is a subjective claim no matter how we look at it.
If someone says this is the greatest writer, the greatest writer according to whom and
according to what standards, what is the, and I think that's the place to start.
The Herrick who I mentioned has worked in visual forms.
The reception of poets can be so odd.
He was completely unknown during his time and then was discovered, which is centuries
ago and then was discovered in the 19th century.
So that's a really odd one.
Sometimes people die and then they become really big after that like Emily Dickinson.
But here's someone who just lay underground for centuries.
I mean there's every kind of, and others who like Oscar Wilde who did write some poems,
very popular in his time, very popular afterwards.
It's very hard to know.
We can't know.
I think that it's important that you have, there are going to be those who last through
time.
In the meantime we're living now and it's who we are interested in as individuals.
And that's important.
It's important to living life who we are interested in seeing and watching and reading everything,
who we are.
This is now and these are various, you know, any used bookstore in a small town will make
you sad because you'll become across books that were published, major publishing houses
and you don't know who these people are.
So greatest can only be temporal really.
And if you know the future you don't have one anyway.
It's not just.
The fact of every strong poet being the school of one, but every reader is also a school of
one.
And I think what Amy's saying is just look at what appeals to you.
That's the only important thing.
And the word greatest is a superlative which means it can only be one.
And if many, many people are saying so and so is the greatest, then it can only mean
I like this where it speaks to me.
Yeah, I think great should be a word.
There should be a list of little words you can't use in poetry.
It's great would certainly be one of them.
It says absolutely nothing.
But you touch on the connection to capital in that statement, right?
Like you talk about the industry.
And you can't ignore thinking about great and greatest because every year we've got
every month we have a new award that is going to somebody.
Which requires qualifications and all that.
We need to combine greatest and scarcity.
For Americans.
Yeah.
American blurbs are especially hyperbolic actually.
If you would just compare American blurbs to Irish blurbs or English blurbs or others
in the poetry speaking world, it's pretty striking.
Look at a list of who won Pulitzer Prizes or something all the way back in fiction and
poetry.
You'll see a lot of names that nobody knows or writers that nobody reads anymore.
It's astounding, right?
And that's a relatively new prize, the Pulitzer Prize.
If there were something that went back to the thousands of years, we can only imagine
what would be on that list.
Robert Bridges did write at least one great poem, Arrow's Tearinos.
I feel that actually Arrow's the one that begins.
Arrow's Tearinos.
Yeah, that's the problem.
That's the problem.
That's the problem.
That's the problem.
That's the problem.
That's the problem.
That's a great poem.
There's an example of a great poem, whatever else you want.
That's all you need to do.
I'm told that we need to wrap up.
I'm really glad to have to stop things.
It means everyone's so interested.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
