I'm Ed Nurse-Shesian, Director of the Center.
Welcome to this meeting on cancer and body and mind.
Before I introduce the participants,
I'd like to tell you a few things about future programming.
On October 25th, we have span of infinity.
On November 15th, complexity and emergence.
On November 22nd, we are going to show the movie Particle Fever
and after that, we are going to have a round table.
And on December 6th, we are going to have a program
called French Thureles Poetry, a sampler
that Anne-Marie Levine has organized.
And on December 13th, we will have
search for immortality.
Today's program came about during a conversation I had
with Andrea Califano, where he was telling me
that cancer is always in your body.
And he can correct me if I'm saying it wrong,
because we had a few glasses of wine.
And I may not remember things, right?
But essentially, that cancer is in your body
and what makes the difference.
Or one of the things that makes the difference
is your immune system.
And that one of the factors that affects the immune system
is stress.
And one of the things that can be stressful is being depressed.
So that's what gave us the idea of discussing
the latest findings on cancer, but then also
talking about the role of the mind in some effects
on the immune system.
So today's participants are Andrea Califano, who
has been here before, and who is the Clyde and Helen Woo
Professor of Chemical and Systems Biology at Columbia
in the departments of biochemistry and molecular
biophysics and of biomedical informatics.
He is currently the founding director and chair
of the Columbia Initiative for Systems Biology.
He also serves as associate director
of a bioinformatics in the Herbert Irving Comprehensive
Cancer Center.
I'm not going to read everything but just
to give you an idea.
The next to him is Selena Cenkeang,
who is professor of pathology and professor of immunology
and microbial pathogenesis at wild Cornell.
Her focus is to convert conceptual breakthroughs,
into novel cancer therapies.
She pioneered the concept that controlling the cell
cycling cancer cells can reprogram them for a killing
by a partner agent.
She has implemented this novel strategy
in several hypothesis driven clinical triers of combination
therapy in human cancers such as lymphoma.
Susan Lottgendorf is professor at the Department of Psychology,
Obstetrics and Gynecology and Geology and member
of the Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center
at the University of Iowa.
Her current work funded by the National Cancer Institute
examines how factors such as stress, depression,
social support or link to biological processes
involved in endogenesis, inflammation,
and recurrence in ovarian cancer patients.
Hans Gido Wendell is the principal investigator
at the Cancer Genetics Laboratory at Memorial Sloan Cathering.
He works to identify new cancer therapies
based on the genetic origins of the disease.
He comes from Germany,
and he is a physician.
He is a physician.
He is a physician for the disease.
He comes from Germany and trained in medicine in Arkan
and then was at Edinburgh and is currently
an associate member of the Sloan Cathering Institute.
So that's it, and you can start.
So, just going back to our discussion, I think it was prompted by the fact that over
the last three, four years, there has been a tremendous transformation of the cancer
field due to an increased success of immunotherapies based approaches.
And it started a long time ago with some of the work that Rosenfeld has done.
More recently, Carl June, many others have studied to really harness how we can remove
the veil that hides the cancer from the immune system and therefore have success in some
cases where, from a point of view of either surgery or conventional chemotherapy or even
targeted therapy, there was really no hope left.
And just a couple of weeks ago, a new drug called Pembro has been approved by the FDA
on an accelerated path.
And this drug essentially re-establishes immune function in the context of cancer and has
been tremendously successful for using melanomas and now it's been also tested on gastric cancers
that are positive for the ligand of this particular protein called PDL1.
So based on these unexpected and maybe long expected but not yet delivered suddenly becoming
available successes, we thought that maybe there was going to be an increasing focus on
the immune system even in terms of how immunosuppression contributes in some ways to the development
and progression of cancer.
And certainly there are now even concepts at the NCI that are focusing around the notion
of stress and how stress can potentially be one of the triggers.
And remember we were saying that we have cancer every day, what we mean is that we have, you
know, so a billion cells in our body and the probability that one of those cells has mutations
that would make it to more genetic are very high.
And so something has to be taken care of that on a continuous basis and that's what our immune
system does, basically immediately targets any kind of lesions.
There are also other mechanisms that are built in the cell like senescence and scope apoptosis
but the immune system does a great job of getting rid of initial sort of starts of these
disease.
So that was the context in which this discussion came out and I think it would be great to
hear from Susan whether there have been more sort of the molecular level connection between
stress and anxiety and cancer.
Okay, so in the work that we do, we look at two areas related to cancer, cancer initiation
and cancer progression.
And initiation is the development of cancer and people who don't have cancer already.
And progression is once people have cancer, does the question is does stress help cancer
progress?
So looking at the initiation side, there's, the evidence is really pretty equivocal.
People think that stress can cause cancer, it's out there in the popular literature.
I've had people come up to me in the clinic and say, my sister says I'm such a positive
person, I don't understand why I've got cancer.
And so the role of what stress can do is limited because it's interacting with biology.
One of the things we know in the field of psychonuroimmunology is that there is a very,
very well characterized relationship between stress and the immune system.
And it seems to affect both the cellular immune system and the humeral immune system.
A cute stress tends to stimulate the immune system and it's really chronic stress that
we think about in the context of cancer.
So what's chronic stress?
People have looked at it in terms of chronic loneliness, caretaking, medical students studying
for boards.
Nobody's looked at people studying for, people preparing grants, but you probably get that.
Well, unless you're doing grant after grant after grant.
Today, hearing grant is chronic stress.
Right, because it's one after the other.
But chronic stress particularly where the person has a feeling of helplessness or this
is going to go on and on can affect the immune system because on B cells, on T cells, on
MK cells, on macrophages, there are beta adrenergic receptors, there are glucocorticoid receptors,
and those basically change the functioning of those cells.
So what we've seen in the context of cancer is people started looking in the area of do
in people who have cancer is natural killer cell functioning depressed, is macrophage
functioning changed, is T cell functioning changed.
And basically, there's good evidence that in people with chronic stress and people with
depression, in people who are lonely, that various aspects of cellular immune function
is downregulated in people who have cancer.
And that's where we started out in our research.
And people had looked basically at peripheral blood and we asked the question, what about
in the tumor itself?
And we found that indeed not only in circulating blood but in the area of the tumor, there
was depression of natural killer cell activity.
Then we started looking more directly and saying, well, if there is an effect on host
tumor cells, on immune cells which are supposed to be doing surveillance against tumor cells
or attacking tumor cells, would we see direct effects of stress on tumor cells?
And that started a line of research which I've been involved in with a colleague, Neil
Sood, from MD Anderson and supported by the National Cancer Institute looking at direct
effects on tumor cells.
And so what we see is that in correlational studies and clinical studies that patients
with either higher levels of loneliness or higher levels of tumor norepinephrine, which
is a stress hormone, have higher rates of angiogenesis.
They have, their tumor cells are more aggressive, they're more invasive, they're less likely
to die when they're circulating through the body.
So there seem to be all these relationships.
And conversely with people who are more positive, who have a more, an outlook on life that is
looking more for benefits rather than fear based, they tend to have a stronger immune
system and less of these effects.
So that's sort of the overall picture that we're seeing that stress or negative psychosocial
functioning not only can make the tumor more aggressive but also depletes the body's resistance
against the tumor.
Can I ask you a little bit because this is very interesting.
You talk about a direct effect on the cancer cell but is it mediated by the immune system
or do you think that it's actually immune system independent?
So if you did this in a, in a nutmeg mouse, that's no immune system, would you still
see an effect of stress directly on the tumor cells?
You do.
You do.
Okay.
And so I'll give you some thoughts on mediation.
So if you're looking at how does stress affect tumor cells, you have direct effects through
beta-atronergic receptors on tumor cells and through nerves that are innovating the tumor
mass itself.
You also have indirect effects, for example, through the macrophages so that stress can
– so should we put cancer patients on beta blockers?
Well there's been a lot of interest in that and there have been some pilot studies looking
at that because – Does it make a difference?
Does it make a difference?
I'm not aware of the study.
There have been both positive and negative findings.
It seems to depend on the cancer and it seems to depend on the particular receptors on the
cancer.
But there have been some – there was a meta-analysis done recently and there have been
some pretty successful studies of – and at this point most of the studies are retrospective.
There hasn't been a really solid multi-center clinical trial looking at putting patients
on beta blockers.
I think that in terms of stress, the two areas are probably quite important – one is cytokines.
These are the small molecule and often stress – at the molecular level some of them are
understood is induced inflammatory cytokines.
And that has a huge consequence in terms of every cell in the immune system, how they
receive the cytokine and how in turn generates cytokines.
I think this is a loop that's extremely important.
And one of the consequences about this loop is – there are two things.
One of the sloop is increasing cell number by cell division.
So you cannot have cancer unless the cell division is misregulated.
You need to have – one of the basis for cancer is cells are not controlled as programmed
and stopped dividing.
They keep on dividing.
That's one thing.
The other is as if a train failed to get to the station.
They stopped somewhere in the middle.
And that's lack of differentiation.
But even that we won't have cancer.
The other part is the cells fail to die.
So you need all these parts.
And actually all these are very much affected by cytokines.
Because actually in the immune system T cells, B cells, all these cells – the students
talk about cells in the immune system.
NK represents natural killer cells.
B cells are the cells that make antibodies.
And T cells are two kinds.
One is the T cell that help B cells to make antibodies.
The other is the kind of T cell that itself can kill cells.
And the macrophage is the powerhouse of making inflammatory cytokines.
So I think that is actually – and that's both systemic as well as in tumor.
And a lot of tumor cells are not supposed to make these things, but because they become
tumor cells, they themselves make them.
I think that's the issue.
I think that's the issue.
There's probably more here though, right?
At the moment we're sort of discussing how does your psychology affect your immune system?
We all know that, right?
You're stressed and you hope this flares up.
And obviously there is a connection here.
You can probably turn it around as well.
You can say, well, people have different abilities to deal with stress, different abilities to
deal with the stress of a cancer diagnosis, cancer treatment, cancer going to the hospital
back and forth themselves.
And that may affect – well, it may affect the outcome.
It may affect the way they can handle it.
I'm talking about something that I have no clue of because I'm not a psychiatrist.
But I would imagine for patients who are diagnosed who have cancer, their own ability to deal
with stress, you know, having friends, having their network, having whatever helps you to
deal with all your own predisposition to deal with stress affects the way that the cancer
in turn affects them.
I don't know if that is measurable in outcome, in survival and so on.
But it probably is a big factor for patients and a big difference.
If you look in a hospital on any ward with 30, 40 patients, you're going to have a spectrum
of people who respond to it by saying, well, you know, it is what it is and I'll deal
with it and you'll have people who respond very differently.
And, you know, so I think that we've now discussed the – these sort of how does your
psychology affect your immune system and cytokines and macrophages.
But the mind and cancer problem, you can probably turn it around and it's not that I have
anything.
One of the things that turns out to be consistently really important in terms of coping is social
support.
And one of the things – and the kind of social support is also really important.
So for example, in ovarian cancer patients, which is mostly what I study, we've seen
that it's the kind of social support where people feel emotionally connected with people,
where they feel like they can talk to somebody, there's somebody at their back as opposed
to there's somebody that can bring them chicken soup, that they can borrow money from, etc.
So it's this emotional connection that we see related to survival in ovarian cancer
patients.
We see it related to tumor norepinephrine and we see it related to actually the gene expression
at the time of diagnosis that there are – there's really a different signature in people who
have high social support versus low social support.
So I'm not understanding that what you were talking about, you were talking more about
patients, the stress coming from having the cancer, having the diagnosis.
Resources and dealing with it, right?
But after having the disease.
Yes.
Right.
It's too different.
That's what I'm talking about too.
So nobody's then talking about or it's not relevant, the issue of social support, stress
and so on prior to the diagnosis.
I think that's where Susan was saying that the waters are much murkier because I think
after you get cancer there's a clear function in the immune system and the question is whether
because the number of cells, the cancer cell is huge once you have cancer is detectable,
it's a huge number.
Once you have – when you start – you essentially start to get cancer, the number of cells
is small, the potentially even maybe a minimal function of the immune system is already sufficient
to keep it in check.
So I think that's maybe what – you know what I see, again, I'm also like Gito, I'm
not a psychiatrist or psychologist, but I work in basic sciences and one thing that we see
that is very interesting is that in tissues there's always this balance.
And essentially you have processes that compete, typical processes that compete in tumors are
something called apoptosis which is programmed cell death and proliferation.
And literally you can in lymphoma for instance, you know, which is on a field that you have
eminent experts here, it was long thought that there was a process for instance by abrogating
the function of P53 that you would essentially block apoptosis.
But actually in the LBC alpha, diffused laspis-helymphoma, there is a significant fair bit of apoptosis
going on.
It's just that the proliferation is higher than the apoptosis and the tumor grows.
If you can bring down – either increase apoptosis a little bit or bring down proliferation,
then the tumor shrinks.
And so it's really a balance between two things.
And one thing that we've observed and this came out from some research results that we
have not even published yet is that cancer seems to be really divided in two groups.
There's a group where proliferation pathways seem to have a really marked sort of signature
and there's a group where immunosuppressive pathways seem to have a significant signature.
And the ones that are immunosuppressive are much less proliferative.
So for instance, neuroendocrine tumors, completely non-proliferation tumors, they can be indolent
for years but they're totally immunosuppressive.
They have like, they eliminate, they mask themselves behind the veil of a shroud of secretness
and the immune system can undertake them.
And there's work by – or Weisman that I think has been really seminal in the area
of specific receptors called CD47 that actually are called the don't eat me signal.
Basically they're used by stem cell that still have an immature self image that would
otherwise be attacked by the immune system to basically tell your own immune system don't
eat me as I go and do, you know, generate the tissue that I need to go and generate.
It turns out that the vast majority of tumors actually express the CD47 receptor and IRV
has been having some pretty substantial success and it's now running some large clinical
studies with inhibitors of the CD47 receptor just to see whether we can – so that's
an example where it would be very difficult for your own immune system to play a role
because it's really – there's nothing to attack.
You know, the essentially the tumor is invisible.
So it doesn't matter whether your immune system is suppressed or not.
Just tumor is like thin air.
But if the tumor becomes visible where you essentially for instance in proliferative tumors
where you have less immunosuppression then it may be possible that what Susan was saying
may play a big role.
So in fact I think many people wonder what the nutrition plays a role in cancer and that's
another aspect I think that of eating healthily and sort of, you know, so far the reasons
of the glucose metabolism.
I think there's definitely a good reason is that one clearly recognized fact is the
metabolism of a tumor cell is very different from a normal cell.
And because the tumor cells you would think that they are more powerful but actually if
you remove these tumor cells and take it out they die very quickly.
They are much more dependent on certain type of metabolism.
So one of the ways now thinking about attacking tumor and sparing a normal cell is actually
attacking the cancer metabolism.
We're not there yet but there's a direction.
The reason I want to bring this up again is the fact that all the things that you've
mentioned and you mentioned about a cell cycle because we study that at some point it's
actually integrated at metabolism it's like a real stat because that's the central sort
of business wheel of a cell.
It gives you energy, it gives you resources to generate manganese so a mother cancer cell
can divide into two daughters cell.
Without this the cancer cell will die and this is a very important thing.
And I think what is also important is the way that if unless a patient is not treated
otherwise when patients treat it often times the dose is too high, the drug and that high
dose itself induces stress.
And I think that's the direction that we are actually designing clinical trial beginning
to think about this because sometimes the consequence of those high dose is worse than
the benefit of it.
And one major thing is interfering with metabolism tremendously in a bad way and the other is
induced stress.
I think this is a very, I think this stress and immune system are not separable.
These two things are almost integrated.
Is there another reason actually that started to come out just now of why for instance using
drugs in ways that sort of overwhelm maybe negative positive is that drugs essentially
a pressure on the cancer system and as a pressure typical evolutionary system it promotes
essentially survival of certain clones, essentially some cells that have specific characteristics
and kills the ones that don't have those characteristics.
Because the ones that have the survival characteristics are much worse cells than the ones that
get killed.
And so you're basically, you're creating an environment where the absolute worst cells
that would then give you a very aggressive tumor are now given total empty space to survive
and to proliferate.
And so what happens very frequently for instance is that you see that these tumors are initially
shrink significantly after you get a particular treatment but then the tumor that comes up
after that becomes extremely aggressive and actually kills the patient very, very rapidly.
So these are things that we're just starting to understand.
In fact I think almost invariably anyone who unfortunately get diagnosed the initial treatment
always work a little bit and sometimes work very well.
The time that's very difficult and very challenging sometimes is hopeless is a relapse.
So I think what we really have to understand is how the progression leads to that relapse
and all these factors whether it's stress, whether it's nutrition, whether it's support
because I think support is not only for cancer.
Anyone who has childbirth would like to have support.
All these factors are universal.
They're not just for cancer alone.
It's the entire well-being of the individual.
And I think for cancer I think probably the most important thing is to really understand
and everybody's different.
I'm sure you know this too.
We do genomic sequencing and you take the normal cell from a cancer patient and we do
this all the time.
And you ask how many mutations, you know, normal cells.
I bet you will have a million and I have a million, you have over a million.
But you're okay.
And what is different is what's the difference between your two more cells and normal cells.
So I think ultimately to really get very deeply, we sort of have to recognize the individual.
Every person is different and to really understand that deeper in order to integrate all this
information and get to it.
Otherwise we're going around the circle because until today cancer in most cases is not curable
because we're going around the circle.
And I think it's pretty important.
But we have the tools now, right?
We have a lot of tools.
Incredible tools.
There's also a lot of promise because I would say five years ago we don't have all these
targeted agents.
We have no ability to deal with some more number of cancer cells.
But I think we do.
We have a lot of systems, biology, everything to help us deal with that.
I think it's a very interesting point right now because I'm actually quite skeptical towards
targeted agents that go after a specific oncogen simply because, you know, typical examples
be rough, right?
So every one of our...
But the combination of therapies ultimately need it.
Exactly.
But also I think we need to hit...
Right now we're concentrating on the oncogenes.
I think we need to find very much like your work, we have to find the non-oncogenes that
are the Achilles heel of the tumor.
And for instance, a typical example you were mentioning about the fact that we have cells,
normal cells that have ulcerous mutation.
Well the most famous one is BRAF, which is a mutation in melanoma.
It's basically over 50% of melatonin have these mutations in this gene.
A very specific point of the BRAF protein.
But all our nevi have BRAF mutation.
But they're not tumors.
They're just normal cells.
So clearly it can be just BRAF alone.
And so when you look at the tumor, the big problem is that every single cell of the tumor
is different.
Why?
Because the very first event that goes wrong in the tumor is called loss of a tumor suppressor,
which means that your tumor starts accumulating mutations much faster than your normal cells.
And when you do that, essentially every tumor cell accumulates different mutations.
So I think one of the major difficulties, and when you talk about relapse being the major
problem, is that what drugs do, they hit the part of the tumor they can't hit.
And whatever is left out that doesn't respond to the drug emerges and no longer sensitive
to the drug.
So I think what we need to figure out, and we actually published a paper today's ago
in Cell showing that there are these sort of bottlenecks in the regulatory system of
the tumors where all these mutations that you could try to hit with individual drugs
are actually all converging and they have to go through just a small number of proteins.
And we think very strongly that those are the proteins you want to hit.
For instance in prostate cancer, it doesn't matter which genes you have mutated.
In order to have the aggressive form of prostate cancer that will actually kill the patient
and become undergens independent and become metastatic, you have to have co-activation
of two proteins, one called FOXM1 and one called CMPF.
If you don't have the super-activated, you will not get the aggressive prostate cancer.
If you have them activated, you will get aggressive prostate cancer.
So instead of hitting the oncogen upstream, where of which many can be differently mutated
in different cancer cells within the same tumor, if you hit those two proteins, you're
going to be in a much better shape.
I think these are concepts that are just starting to be developed and it will be a long time
before we apply them to the plane.
I think if every cancer is parallel in this type of understanding, then we can begin to
elevate our total understanding.
I think that's very necessary.
Unfortunately, we do have much better tools than we did before.
In the last five years, things really, really move.
So that's the hope.
I think we can say that.
It's very exciting.
But the part that I do feel is important is anyone who is really trying to understand
the cancer do have to consider what a normal cell does.
Otherwise, we don't have the differential between tumor and normal.
I think that's very important.
After all, at the end, we are wanting to preserve is a normal and not the cancer.
So what do you think?
What do I think?
Yeah, so the topic here is, what's the topic?
Mind and cancer, right?
In my view of how cancer rises, it's a population of cells that sit in your bone marrow or wherever
in your lung that escape all the normal control mechanisms.
So cells that are in your bone marrow and that make blood cells that are tightly controlled
by cytokines and factors in the environment.
The metabolism is controlled.
Everything is tightly regulated.
And maybe your psychology even affects the ability to do things.
The cells lose all of that control.
They bypass it step by step.
They become independent of growth factors.
They survive self-stress that a normal cell can't survive.
Their metabolism becomes completely disconnected from any outside stimulus or even the availability
of nutrients.
They become like yeast on a petri dish.
And so I think an important point for me in the discussion here is to discuss how does
the mind affect cancer and vice versa.
Cancer are sort of population of cells that tries to escape from any outside influence.
They become rogue.
They become terrorists who say, you know, we are out of your reach.
Don't talk to us.
They escape the immune system by losing genes or proteins.
The immune system may be able to recognize.
They throw them away.
So there's a very strong selection for losing any kind of control and becoming rogue cells.
So they escape these control mechanisms.
Physiological, immunological, maybe psychological.
And with therapies, I think now our discussion is sort of going to the genes inside the cancer
and how we may be able to target them.
And I think that reflects the fact that these cancers use these mechanisms to become independent.
And we have some tools to target and to try to restore some dependence on outside factors.
Right.
But last night you were saying something that you implied that you were more pessimistic
about an outside treatment.
No, you asked me a very pointed question whether we can eradicate cancer, which is sort of
as a question like, can we overcome death?
Right?
I mean, in a way, that's one way you can understand a question.
You can ask, can a given patient survive cancer?
And we have great drugs.
Can we eradicate cancer?
Can we?
No.
But why do you compare cancer to that?
Why don't we be eradicated, for example, smallpox?
So you immediately equate, we can't eradicate cancer because we can't eradicate death.
Why do you make that connection?
Cancer is part of our biology.
It's built in.
That's what I was asking you to elaborate.
It's built into our biology.
There is, we, just by breathing oxygen, you are going to accumulate mutations.
Oxygen is very toxic, in fact.
But you can't live without it.
Right?
Yeah, we need it.
I think that we-
So you accumulate these mutations and they have an advantage.
Without accumulating mutations, we would still be single organisms somewhere in a little
puddle of the coast of who knows where.
Right?
We would not come off the trees.
So evolution requires some versatility, some flexibility.
There has to be a way that you can mutagenize genes, that you can change things in a germ
line and by extension or zen somatic tissues and so on.
So that versatility I think comes at a price.
So whatever is the evolution of a species is also the evolution of cells.
And cancer is evolution of cells, gone rogue, evolution of cells that decided we don't need
the rest of you.
I think following that point is that to have mutation accumulate, again, you need to
mutate the cells to divide.
Otherwise, you will not increase the population.
And for cells in immune system, they are different from other cells in a way that they
have this continuous ability to rearrange their DNA.
And as a result, the frequency of making a mistake is a lot higher.
So this obviously is the division and the selection.
There is a parallel between selection for the fittest and the cancer, that's for sure.
But I just want to point out that in terms of eradicating cancer, correct, we are not
anywhere near eradicating all the cancers, but some cancers are cured compared with what
it was 20 years ago.
That is correct.
So I think we have to look at different cancer in different ways.
For example, pancreatic cancer is extremely challenging.
But childhood leukemia, you can treat it.
And the cure rate is very high.
So I think we have to look at specific, we cannot draw a...
I think your question of can we eradicate cancer?
It would be translated into can we eradicate infection diseases?
Not can we eradicate smallpox, because smallpox is just one type of infection disease.
If you look at the stickular cancer, chorionic cancer, basically, you want to put it close
to one under presentation on cure.
So you have eradicated those, but it's still, it's just like saying, yes, smallpox, we have
eradicated.
Well, but the idea I think that I found very interesting in the way Gido was talking about
it was that, as he said it again today, that unlike an infectious disease where there is
an outside agent that causes the infection, that the problem with cancer is that it's
essentially inherent in your biology.
Even in designing therapies.
I mean, Selena just talked about different therapies.
Because we all start from a fertilized egg.
This egg divides.
No, I understand that.
And in the process, every division gives a possibility to mutate.
And the best cells survive, usually those not fit would be eliminated.
But there would be times all of a sudden you have a mutation that has a survival advantage
and those are the ones.
And all some of the cancer, for example, one cancer called multiple myeloma, it's found
in the bone.
And often the average age of occurrence is very late.
But now we understand that there is a period of time and it's called emgas.
It means monoclonal agomopathy of undetermined significance.
Why?
Because you could actually detect a tiny, tiny bit of something and that could take 20, 30
years to develop.
And that's an example.
You have something already going wrong, very early on, but there's no general symptom.
And I can imagine during the process, 20, 30 years, the nutrition, the stress, the mind,
that everything would definitely influence its progression.
So I'm going to take a walk from there and go back to something that you were asking
about Ed when you were talking about cancer initiation.
And what do we know about how stress affects cancer initiation?
Because it takes place during that 20, 30 years or whatever.
That's one of the reasons why it's so hard to study because you can get 10,000, 20,000
people and a small group of them have gotten cancer.
But one of the areas that people are starting to study, which you might be interested in
as a psychoanalyst, is what we call early life adversity.
Which is going back to how is a person initially set up when their physiological systems are
very mutable in a way.
And there's been a lot of work looking at when people have inadequate mothering, when
they're neglected, when they're abused.
The endocrine systems don't develop normally.
The immune system doesn't develop normally.
And so you get a sort of a vulnerability towards later insults.
One of the things that people have started studying in the context of cancer is what
happens when you have an early vulnerability like that.
And then you get stress later in life.
And there's a group at Ohio State that has looked at people with skin cancers and they've
looked at the skin lesions of people with early life stress, with early, with no early
life stress but later life stress and with both.
And the lesions of the people who have had both, and so it's sort of like two psychological
hits are where the most aggressive and showed in terms of the functioning of the immune
cells show the most vulnerability in the immune cells.
So that's sort of thinking about early life plus later life.
What's happened along that transition?
I think this goes back also to this notion that I mentioned before of an endogenous versus
exogenous nature of cancer.
Is the nature of cancer inside the cell or is it outside the cell?
We know that it's both.
In fact, I think the first discovery of oncogene has been viral oncogenes.
That's where the Nobel Prize was awarded to the virus.
The notion that you can actually transfer a gene from the outside environment into the
cell turns out that viral oncogen is in fact something that's been integrated in your own
cells, in your genome.
But if you ask about something like smallpox or take HIV or something, none of the HIV
proteins exist anywhere else in your cells.
You can safely hit them.
You can target them.
You can block them.
You can take a cocktail of inhibitors against every HIV enzyme you can find.
It's not going to affect your own cells, at least if the drugs are as good as they should
be.
So the answer is different.
I mean, all of us spend most of our time figuring out what's the difference between
the cancer and the normal tissue.
Is there anything that we can hit in a cancer that's not going to destroy your normal tissue?
And that's just really hard.
I mean, you end up with a few mutations and a few differences and a few concepts but compared
to a smallpox.
That's where the question is.
So the environmental factor stresses one, but let's say cigarettes more.
There are those things that are considered to, if not cause, certainly contribute to
development of cancer.
So smoking causes.
Causes.
Right.
But smoking breaks the DNA inside your own cell.
So it actually induces mutation.
But the other signal, for instance, if you look at estrogen, estrogen does not induce
mutations.
But it's like putting fuel on the cell and inducing...
For the two most saturated roles, faster and faster.
So women who are exposed to estrogen for longer period of life are much more risk of breast
cancer than women are not.
And it's not because of mutations.
It's because of...
Again, going back to the fact that it's the controlling of how many divisions.
And that is central integrating whether it's a signal coming from estrogen from your...
And we all work on cancer, we all recognize the importance of location, location, location,
the environment.
Because environment gives you such...
Give cancer cells such support.
If you cut out the environment, there will be one way to remove the cells.
And no matter which signal it comes, at the end of the day, it really centralize in three
issues.
One is how many cell times this tumor cell able to divide.
And second is after division, would they normally die as they are supposed to, or they lose
that control and keep on dividing?
A third thing is they move migration.
And that's the cause of metastasis.
So it goes from one place to the other to the other.
And these are really the three major components.
We all recognize that, but it's very difficult.
And if you say controlling that, how your well-being is definitely a very important control for
that.
No doubt.
Whatever reason that leads to the well-being is a good thing.
It's actually the environment, I think, is probably the number one reason why we can't
cure cancer as much as we would like to.
Because right now, the way pharmaceutical companies have gone, and fact scientists have gone at
trying to cure cancer for a long time, is to screen compounds against cells that are
taken out of the body and put in a petri dish.
And they find a lot of compounds that kill those cells.
Unfortunately, when those cells are in the body, they don't get killed.
Or you have to achieve toxicity that kills normal cells at the same rate.
So this is because, in fact, as you mean a pistol in some very seminal experiments,
you know, a couple, about 20 years ago, where she showed that if you take a cell with the
exact same mutation, and you put it in one part of the body, or in another part of the
body, you generate cancer or not.
And so it is completely dependent on the signals that the cell gets in addition to the endogenous
sort of disruption of the DNA.
And that's why most thinking is that cancer cells are tough, they overtake you, but in
many ways they are also vulnerable.
It depends on the environment.
And when you talk about environment, there are multiple factors, you know.
I think, wouldn't you say that someone who has a very kind of cheer for a personality,
many times tend to be able to control a lot of things in life and healthier, too?
I think this psychology is two ways, it's not one way, isn't it?
Well, I'm related to that.
Andrea asked me a very interesting question last night, which was, if will to, how you
can measure will to live, and if will to live, because anecdotally physicians report that
if patients with strong will to live may live longer.
And I've been thinking about that because we have not found a gene signature, for example,
of will to live, it would be very nice.
There's actually somebody who has done gene signatures of happiness that has a sense
of meaning to it versus a happiness of, I'm going to go out and drink tonight, and those
look differently, and they look differently in terms of, for example, inflammatory profiles.
And you know, inflammation being one of the things that adds fuel to the fire of cancer.
Will to live would be very, very nice if we could characterize, and maybe that's something
that you can do with your systemic looking at things.
Maybe just to throw out completely as you talk about the route to live in the psychology,
just an idea that, again, I know nothing about, but just a completely different track of thought
here.
Cancer cells affect you in a lot of ways.
So, cancer patients lose weight because these cancers make hormones, and cancers change
your physiology, right?
I don't know if anyone is looking at how does a cancer cells, how do they affect your mood,
your psychology?
Do they have a direct, measurable biochemical influence on your mental state, on your will
to live with me?
There's actually a whole emerging area of research in that area because, and there's
a number of people around the country who are working on that.
If you think of cancer cells in addition to, you know, they want to grow, et cetera, they're
also like inflammatory factories.
And they're producing aisle six, they're producing aisle eight, an audience.
A whole...
Or does neuroendocrine cancer system make or do you have that hormone, right?
I'm sure.
What happens when those inflammatory cytokines go through the bloodstream, there is a well
characterized syndrome that happens when inflammatory cytokines hit the brain.
And if you think of how you feel when you have the flu, which is basically inflammation,
you know, people don't want to eat, they lay down, they don't want to talk to people, this...
It's hard to concentrate, this sort of lassitude, and it essentially mimics the vegetative symptoms
of depression, this sort of fatigue and difficulty concentrating.
And so there's an area of research looking at to what extent is the depression that is...
That may be experienced by cancer patients, not only secondary to a person looking at
themselves and saying, I have cancer, this is awful, but secondary to this physiologic,
what's called sickness.
For many cancers, I think that's a main complaint of treatment and of cancer is this feeling
of depression and tiredness.
Well, let's forget that, caccadesia, for instance, which is basically your loss of body mass and
is one of the fundamental reasons why cancer patients die.
So if you're depressed and you don't want to eat, that's the worst possible thing you
can do to your body.
So in some way, the immune system is one aspect of the connection with stress and depression.
But the other one is more of the metabolic, you know, and just...
Yeah.
Your orgasm fed to the point that we can survive the disease.
So is there any work on why some people don't get cancer?
It's in our system and the cells are mutating all the time and it's an ongoing process.
So why is it that some people get it and some people...
Yeah, this is actually some really interesting study.
Right now, if we send the several labs that are studying why some very heavy smokers don't
get cancer and there are very likely some highly protective genes that help you by cancer.
I can engineer a mouse in the lab that's not going to get cancer.
You can work?
I can engineer a mouse in the lab that will not get cancer.
Put an extra copy of P10 or P53.
They will be perfectly...
It's a major cancer of a tumor suppressor gene that's called P53.
It's one of the major roadblocks that gets mutated in almost every cancer.
We have two copies of it.
If you make an animal with three copies, they're perfectly happy, they won't get cancer.
Evolution didn't give us the third copy.
Didn't think it was necessary.
You gave the third copy to human.
How are you going to do it?
It's a lot of things.
Where would you do it?
Well, how soon do you do it?
Where do you do it in the zygote?
Yeah.
You engineer...
Right, I mean, this whole...
What do you mean?
It's a collision.
You have a big box here, right?
Your immune system will not work actually.
In a lab animal, you can do it.
You can get a terminal center, you can do it.
You said you didn't make a lab available and it will not get cancer.
Yeah, it's published.
The...
But I think...
The downside.
The cancer...
Oh, okay.
It will not develop those cancer you have tested.
There might be others we don't know yet.
And also, P-53 does many, many things.
I certainly would not want a third copy for myself.
I wouldn't.
I'm not advertising it, but I'm saying...
People have made and they have engineered these mice and they are protected from cancer.
There are people that have a third copy of P-53.
I don't think so.
I mean, there is the opposite.
There are families that have mutated one of those genes.
It's called leaf romaine syndrome and they are at very high risk of cancer.
But there's another...
They're two famous genes called tumor-suppressor gene.
The other is called RB.
And I was discovered when children have retinal blastoma, they...
Every single one of them lose this gene.
And now we know.
The difference, I think, is different from P-53 in the sense that we have studied this
for many years and followed the patient.
And what we found was both genes at the beginning of the cancer, you lose one copy or perhaps
have mutation and during relapse, the P-53 is always mutated or lost and not functioning.
But RB somehow often is preserved at least one of the copy.
There are times both copy loss.
So that means that perhaps even that gene that is tumor-suppressor gene, that actually
a cancer cell still needed to develop the cancer.
So things are not completely black and white.
It really depends on the context.
So as you do more studies of people's genetic makeup, are you...
Are you going to be able to detect what is causing some people to develop cancer and
some people to...
No, we don't.
We now know at least in our study, in one case, we know exactly in one type of lymphoma, treated
with a very recent accelerate FDA approved drug, what is causing the relapse that we know,
as we follow the patient before treatment, after treatment, and until it's relapse and
ask what happened.
Then we put...
Take that gene away from the normal...
Not the normal tumor cell and this tumor no longer respond to the drug and everything.
So that can be done.
As far as what differentiates initiation, I don't think anybody has an answer.
No, but also I think you're asking a very important question because I think this is
right now, in my opinion, a little bit the failure of the current way of thinking about
cancer.
If you're going database right now, there are thousands of cancer patients that have
been sequenced.
So we actually know the mutation that you have across 20, 25 types of cancer, the more.
We know also, because of work that Burt Vogelstein did, but a couple of decades back, that cancer
is not a single hit with very few exceptions, and even those are probably also not a single
hit, but you know, you need six, seven, eight different mutations that accumulate before
you actually get cancer.
If you go into those databases and you look for the genes that we know today, there's
only maybe 20 or 30 percent of the patients that have more than one mutation among those
under genes.
The remaining ones either have just one hit or they have nothing, which means that where
are the six or seven other hits?
They are mutations that are probably what we call private mutations, that is mutation
in genes.
There are somewhere upstream of the genes that induce cancer, but you can't find them because
you don't find two patients that have the same exact pattern of mutation.
So if you do a very simple math, you will find that there are more cancer genotypes,
that is more possible ways in which you could get cancer, than there are cells on the planet.
And so what we're seeing right now in patients is just a very, very small sample of all the
possible ways in which you could get cancer, which means that you can't just use statistics
to figure out how it works, because you're not going to be able to find enough patients
that have that particular group of three mutations or four mutations that give you cancer with
that particular response to a drug, for instance.
And so the only way to do it, you know, we are at least, that's what we are advocating,
is you have to understand how cancer works.
That is how cancer literally works as a microprocessor that has had some pieces disconnected or rewired,
and I have to figure out why it's working in the wrong way.
I think that going after individual mutation is going to be a long way coming before you
can get the full repertoire.
Yeah.
Very, very dynamic.
Of course, there are cancers that are easier than others, and actually, the ematological
malignancies are particularly good class of cancer to study because they tend to have
fewer mutations than the other, but if you take a melanoma compared to a childhood leukemia,
it's like having your DNA put through a blender in melanoma versus having your DNA with a couple
hits here and there.
And that is where we can understand sort of leukemia and we treat them much better than
we can treat right now melanoma.
Well, that part of the reason is that for the cancer in the blood, you are in a position
to define which state and its normal counterpart because you can take the cells.
For other type of cancer, like ovarian, a breast, it's called solid tumor.
You take the tumor, it's not every cell in that mass is a cancer cell.
You have normal cells, you have everything, they talk to each other and it's very difficult
and can go that.
But if you take leukemia, you could just take study pure leukemia cells.
And then you also have, by the signature, you also know what the normal cell, that's
the normal counterpart and what the normal cell does.
So that helps you understand something.
But some of the things we learned in the blood cancer is applicable to solid but not everything.
Yeah, not everything.
Again, it gets to the point of location and environment because you're not the same.
So you sequence genes of 50,000 people who have reached the age of 80 with no cancer and
compared it to people who have had cancer.
You wouldn't be able to.
It would be difficult because as I said that we take our, the normal cells we often get
from patients from the cheeks.
Wow, okay.
And so you take mine, take Andreas, take Edo, take Susan, take yours.
I bet our mutations are not the same, normal.
So it's a very difficult one.
And I do sometimes think about what you are saying, I mean they were, they are people
who lived to over 100 and they have no cancer.
What if we look at them, their genes, what would happen?
It's very difficult because for instance, you know, people have actually done these studies
for what we call complex diseases like diabetes, obesity, you know, other major ones.
And you know, even autism.
And what they find is that when you look at each individual gene in isolation, you find
thousands of genes, each one with a tiny, tiny, tiny contribution.
And so it is impossible to put together the actual pattern because if you have something
that says, oh, if you have this gene, it's not an alteration, but it's a germline variant.
If you have this variant, you will live longer, but your ability to live longer is the probability
you live longer is 1.2% more than somebody who doesn't have it.
What do you do with that?
You know, it's just really not an actionable number.
But that's the tail end of the curve, right?
So at the other end, you talk about GWAS studies basically, right?
At the other end of the spectrum, you do have things like braka, braka mutations and breast
cancer.
You have it.
It has a consequence.
You need a surgeon.
I mean, you really need to have a discussion, right?
So there is this curve of things that are really important and it goes all the way down.
And the more you look, the more you'll find things, of course, that are, you know, really
do we need to do something about this?
No, we're talking about two different things.
So for risk of cancer, absolutely agree with you, you know, braka, one, braka, two, et cetera.
What he's talking about is protective alleles.
Protective alleles, I don't know if there's any protective alleles that has been discovered
so far with eye penetrant.
And as I said, like in more complex diseases, so breaking the vase, it's easy fixing it a
lot harder and it's much more polygenic.
So you need the contribution of many, many different genes.
That's where you get into this situation where you may have the 100 patients that defeat
cancers, they may do it in 100 different ways.
Well, it's just a flip side of the same question, right?
If you can define the risk alleles, then the absence of the risk is the protection.
Yeah, but protective alleles are much harder to find than the risk alleles.
So you can't design that study.
You cannot have a population of 100,000 people who will not get cancer.
It's hard to design that study.
It's easy to design the study where you say, yeah, I have 5,000 patients with breast cancer
and 5,000 patients who don't have it and I can compare them.
We're actually going at that kind of question, but from a different sort of angle, I'm part
of a consortium development project that's looking at long-term ovarian cancer survivors.
So these are stage three and four ovarian cancer patients who may have a predicted lifespan
of like three and four years.
And these are people who have lived past 10 years and we're looking at their molecular,
we're looking at the tumors molecularly and we're also looking at their psychological
factors.
And we're interviewing them about what do you think has led to your long-term survival
and we're also looking at what's mutated, what's not mutated, et cetera.
So I don't have results for you yet, but that's a potential approach to look at who survives
that you wouldn't expect to.
So you don't have to result from the gene part, but for the interview part, what have
you found?
We haven't looked at them yet.
We're just collecting data on it.
You're looking at their immune system?
No, we're looking at their tumors.
We're not, at this point, we're not looking at their immune system.
But also, I think that this kind of study has not been done, maybe in cancer with the
right control, but they've been done for instance in cardio myopathies and now the type of,
you know, in diabetes, they've looked at huge populations, 30,000 individuals, you know,
and that they're profiled using snip chips.
And I think traditionally it's been much harder to find anything protective than to
find something that appears.
The tears are alleles.
They're few, but they're a little bit easier to find.
Protective alleles, I think, is a much more complicated story.
I think it's the same thing with stress.
You can point at stress and you can say that that's bad, you know, psychologically.
And what's the biology of stress?
But it's harder to define the biology of what's good.
What's good.
I wanted to point to another aspect of cancer in mind, which we haven't touched upon, which
I think it's very important, which is that to defeat cancer or you say, what was the
word that you used before?
Just to eradicate cancer.
You need great scientific minds and I think that this is a major threat right now because
right at a time where biologists has come, has been empowered by extraordinary tools,
both in terms of availability of small molecules, but also in terms of the ability to now literally
look at every single molecule aspect of a cell or image of a cell, we are seeing a dramatic
decrease in inflation on the ability to do science.
And I think this has been a dramatic setback that I think should be brought out more often
and more forcefully to the public attention because we are close to make some real amazing
breakthroughs.
Just to give you an example of what's happening, until three years ago or two years ago actually,
the number of approved, FDA approved cancer drugs had declined steadily over the years
and then the last two years have seen a dramatic increase in the number of therapeutic agents
that have been approved.
That's an indication, in my opinion, that something is starting to work and it's starting to work
in a very major way.
And I think this is to a large extent due to the fact that we now are empowered by the
tools of technology that we didn't have before.
It is to me dramatic and overbearing that right at the time where you have these technologies
that can, and we have now figure out cancer a little bit as a mechanistic story that we
don't know, essentially we see a decrease in the number of students, postdocs and faculties
that we can actually put to work.
And so the decrease in resources.
Resourceism.
And actually this is kind of sad because it's at the time we're embarrassed by too many
riches.
We have the tool, we have the reagent, and we need the mind to integrate all this information
and that's we need resources.
And it's very difficult.
It's very difficult.
It's very difficult.
It's very kind of discouraging to the next generation because they see the future is
so kind of not promising.
Well, there's a reason to...
Look, I told you yesterday when I teach my introductory class in Colombia, what I tell
my students is you should be, you should continue in this direction only if this is
the only thing you can do.
If there's any other thing you can do, go do it.
Don't do it.
I say the same thing.
I say the same thing.
Because I think to do what you do is not a job, it's a passion.
Unless you have it, you're not going to be able to contribute.
So you have less people who are more passionate.
I'll give you an example.
The average lifespan of a postdoc today, before they could get six to seven, eight years.
That's insane because those are the most productive year of a scientist right after their PhD.
So it used to be that people were getting hired even out of the PhD.
Yeah, we were at the time when we were postdoc.
Three years later, you become assistant professor.
Now two postdoc is standard.
And that's six years.
And it's struggling.
And it's a very difficult position.
And it's really...
But that's the kind of funding in the sciences that we're using.
Yes, it's the lack of regeneration of science.
We definitely are.
We definitely are.
And that's very unfortunate because it is not an entertainment of your intellectual
need.
It's actually a time that things can really get integrated to really make a difference.
So is it nice to have federal funding?
Is that an issue?
Right.
Well, it's a domino effect because the federal funding is the biggest funding agency.
So the federal funding drops, then they are smaller foundations.
Then it's a ripple effect.
Then everybody goes to those foundations.
And all of a sudden those foundations and also those foundations depend on donations.
The donation is not as robust as it was before because I'm on a board.
A couple of them.
I know that.
It's a very difficult time.
Very difficult time.
No, I agree.
Money is always better than less money.
There's another side to it.
I think there's an interesting article in Lancet or something maybe last year or so about
waste in research.
I read it and I thought there's a truth to this.
And part of it is the nature of it.
You don't know where you're going.
So of course you get lost and you take the wrong direction and it's easier when you have
a direct threat.
It's probably less wasteful.
So that's the nature of what we do.
Right?
I mean, it's not predictable.
So you don't think...
Yeah, I think it's...
There is also a lot of waste in the system which you look at.
And you go to some of these meetings and you look at what's happening there.
Yeah, I think it's a vicious cycle because I remember...
I remember when I was a graduate student in the postdoc, you have certain liberty to
exercise your creativity and you don't have to justify what you do tomorrow.
But now the pressure is so high that everyone is under the pressure.
You need to produce.
You need to produce.
That's part of the reason that things become...
It makes people be very conservative in repeating things that we all know over and over.
And that's actually...
Taking tiny little steps.
I think that's...
And often you just look at it and you think, really did we need to do that experiment again?
It really is not...
Or paradigm shifts.
Yeah, it's a...
Well, it's risky.
You will not get money from the NIH for something risky.
Or in a...
Paradigm shifting.
No, I mean...
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, as we said yesterday, there are two types of experiments that you do for a
graph, the ones that you've already done and the ones that you will never do.
Right?
All right.
We'll stop here and open up for a question.
Can I ask a question?
Please go to the microphone.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
I have two questions.
One of them is sort of science fiction and the other is a little more addressed to the
idea of cancer and the mind.
The science fiction one arises from what you said about the P-53.
Gene, why can't we have them?
Why?
Why can't the baby is born or when the woman is...
I mean, can you get...
That's a science fiction one.
Can I buy one somewhere?
Seriously.
I mean, is there any...
Okay.
I think being a scientist, you get more and more humbled and modest every day because
we know so little about how nature designed us.
So P-53 is a gene.
If you lose it.
If you consider a cell has to go around a clock to divide.
P-53 kind of the gatekeeper at two points and it cut a sense if the cell should go on
or not go on.
Okay.
This is a tumor surprise.
But it does many other things as well.
You can imagine if you have more than two copies, three copies, what if your cell just won't
be able to move?
You're in trouble.
You probably would never...
There's one function actually.
This is important which is the way you develop immunity, right?
Is because your cells, when they see the antigen in the virus...
They divide.
No, they actually mutate their own DNA.
Okay.
And to do that, you have to suppress T-53 because otherwise the P-53 would kill the cell.
The moment it is the mutation.
So basically, if you now have three copies of P-53, as soon as it's trying to develop
the signature for the virus, the cell dies.
So you would have probably...
I'll make an inducible one.
I'll put an inducible...
It's just what inducible.
Okay.
That's another...
You can make genes in such a way that they're not active and then you give a drug like tetracycline
and it switches the gene on.
You can do this in animals and you would put a gene that kills cancer cells in there that
has cell activity.
That sounds good.
You activate it and you leave it on for 24 hours or 48 hours or two weeks.
Whatever you want.
Yeah.
Gee, I don't know.
It's not that...
It's not that...
That's science fiction but certainly it doesn't really apply to...
Well, so it doesn't apply to human medicine in the broad sense.
It does, maybe with some exceptions.
So some exceptions, for example, are stem cell therapies.
Like we can make stem cells from scratch and we can make tissues from these stem cells.
And for example, if you're a diabetic, we can make from those stem cells insulin producing
cells.
There's a risk that these cells at some point give rise to a cancer.
Now while we make these cells, we can put genes like that in there.
We can engineer these cells to have such a fail-safe mechanism that we can then switch
on.
Right?
So that's something that you can...
In that setting...
I do have diabetes, so I'll talk to you afterward.
The second question is a little more serious and less science fiction, which is I've come
to a lot of these and the NYPSI.
I've never before and I could be wrong.
I don't know about a meeting like this about the sort of mind and the disease.
Diabetes is a good example.
I don't know if you all have ever had a meeting about diabetes and the mind or malaria and
the mind or anything.
So why does cancer get one of these meetings?
What is it about the illness that generates this sort of psychological interest, whereas
others don't?
Or as far as I know, at least not on East 82nd Street.
Thank you.
That Susan has to answer this.
I should say that there are plenty of people doing research on stress and diabetes, stress
and cardiovascular disease, stress and you name the disease.
So maybe this is just the first and a long line of programs.
This was serendipitous because it came out of a dinner table conversation that I had
with Ed about the immune system increased role in fighting cancer.
So we decided to kind of bring this up.
Maybe one of a series.
That there is, right.
Well, it's more life-threatening than the more life-threatening.
No, I don't think so.
I don't think that's true.
But patients react differently if you tell them you have cancer.
You have two years to live.
Or you tell them you have emphysema.
You have two years to live.
There is a different psychological connotation to cancer than to equally deadly diseases
that are not cancer.
Well, when I was in medical student, your comment reminds me one of our professors said, whatever
you do, don't say to a patient, yes, cancer.
Because that's bad.
I think it's true.
I think it's true.
That's the reaction most people have.
The disease comes with a different type of...
First of all, an observation and then a question.
The observation is, as you may have noticed, science this week has the cover story of humanized
mice.
So they can't psychoanalyse the mice yet, but almost everything else is going to be possible
to do with these mice.
When I started medical school 64 years ago, they were curing cancer every day.
Just as we do today.
Of course, the surgeons can cure cancer now.
They cured cancer then.
If it was found at a certain stage and could be surgically removed, you were good.
And the thing that always surprised me was that, for instance, you could have a lung cancer
removed.
And my impression was, well, if this was a four-pack, a year, a day smoker, the cancer
will recur and the rest of the remaining lung.
Interestingly enough, many of these survivors do not develop a second cancer in the same
bed that they develop their first one.
Now the question is, and Atul Gawande was here this week talking to us about being mortal.
And I know you're not clinicians, but I'm sure you come across friends and people who
ask you, in this complex era, when metastatic disease is not the death sentence that it
was 64 years ago, in this complex environment, when the times this week had an article about
the patients who are the rare responders, a clinical trial that has a 15% response
rate, we used to say, well, that's placebo, whatever.
Now we look at the people who are in that 15%, and we see that they are different than the
people in the 85% who don't respond.
From the clinical point of view, from the, you said, we're not there yet.
And that's certainly true.
Incidentally, about the RO1 grants, the average RO1 recipient now is aged 50.
20 years ago, they were aged 38.
That's the most depressing thing I'm going to say.
Yes.
You do seven-year postdocs.
That's the result.
What do you say to a patient now who comes in and says, and incidentally Gawande was, at
Harvard now, they are beginning to teach medical students and residents how to sit down with
the patient and really discuss with the patient where he is and what he wants to do about
it, or she.
What do you say to people in this turbulent era when different cancers are being addressed
in different ways in terms of getting their care because they need it this year?
So we just opened up a Columbia protocol for treating 260 patients in a completely different
way.
These are going to be across six different rare tumors.
And we're going to treat each one of them individually, but not based on their genetics
because we know that many of these tumors actually have no genetic lesions that are directly
tractable.
But really by understanding their vulnerability, what are the entry point?
We use very sophisticated computational models, in fact, an entire basement, one of the largest
supercomputers in the United States just dedicated to solving this problem and then basically
going to a model of the patients that's going to be put in a mouse and just testing what
the conclusions from that model are.
We already have some very exciting results that are coming from this type of approach.
So I think that this is not to say that in the future we're going to treat each patient
on an individual basis, but I think what we're discovering with the exceptional responder
initiative, where we're discovering with this kind of N of one studies, what we're discovering
with this new initiative called basket studies where instead of studying one drug for one
tumor you study an entire repertoire of drugs, each one with its own biomarker.
What we're discovering is that we need to first deal with tumor heterogeneity and we're
going to understand what makes tumors different.
Once you have the key to be able to interpret the data, then you'll be able to just collect
all the different ways in which you treat a subset of tumors in the same way.
In the past, we used to think of a tumor, say bladder cancer, fundamentally different
from breast cancer.
Today, if you actually put together side by side in terms of the actual vulnerabilities,
what are their Achilles heels?
The basal subtype of breast cancer, the basal time of the bladder cancer and the lumenal
of the two are actually much more similar than a basal breast and a lumenal breast.
I think we're starting to look at cancer very much from a molecular perspective and
even though we may learn just there was only a small number of responders when you go across
all the tumors, that ends up being a pretty large number.
I've actually been walking around with a source of stress for 10 years now and I'm
not been given a good answer and I hope you can help me.
My son who's now 12, his lymphatic system didn't form properly and he developed tumors
but they were not cancerous tumors.
At age one, he had a brain CAT scan.
At age two, he had a chest and neck CAT scan.
Again at age six, he had another chest and neck CAT scan and I am really worried about
the effects of the radiation.
He's had probably a dozen x-rays in the chest up until now.
He's 12 and he's athletic.
I worry about him getting hurt, needing more x-rays.
One of the tumors was not able to be removed from the center of his neck so there's a
possibility that could grow in the future and he would need another CAT scan.
So I've been walking around very nervous and paranoid.
Is it my paranoia that I have nothing to worry about or is there something proactive that
can be done before?
He turns 20 and then, God forbid, something happens.
You're like, oh, you have cancer because I feel like he's had quite a bit of radiation.
Is there anything that could be done ahead of time?
Could be checked.
You worry about the adverse effect of radiation.
Yes.
Well, there is some concerns about that but is it proven that all these normal, I mean
not normal, these routine scans?
I think the radiation of an x-ray at the moment is the same as a flight across the Atlantic.
Right.
So many of us fly back and forth across the Atlantic.
Yeah, I think it's about the scan.
So even though he was...
I think the advantages of having a scan to have early detection of the lesion far outweighs
the potential negative effects.
So I think that right now you're doing absolutely the right thing.
And even if something should happen, you should not feel it's your responsibility because
you're doing the right thing.
Well, that's why I'm stressed.
I don't want to just wait and think, what was there a blood test or a non-reige radiation
body skin that could have been done?
You know, because I've been told different things.
But I think that Andrea just pointed out the fact that the advantage outweigh the concern.
Because you want to follow whatever that might be developing and I'm pretty sure it's reassuring
if you see nothing is developing, right?
Well, that's what I'm saying.
The doctors just say, well, if something hurts, bring them in.
But isn't it too late once you feel something and something hurts?
You know the underlying condition, is there been a genetic testing for what your son has?
Yes, he has cystic eye gromas, cavernous lymphin jumas.
There were tumors inside of his body.
Did he find the actual genetics of that?
No, I didn't.
That's it.
So maybe that's one thing.
There are several institutions right now and the NIH that look at diagnosing at the genetic
level some of these very rare diseases.
And in some cases, first of all, that lets you know exactly what it is.
And so you can deal with it better.
But also in some cases you may even find that there are potential approaches that could
be taken to either prevent or delay or so.
I think this is something where you may want to consider one of these sort of, you know,
we know at Columbia we just recruited for instance David Goldstein who's going to head
our institute for genomics.
And he's done some terrific studies at Duke, but at their institutes in Oman, Sinai, many
other places in the country do these kinds of studies.
And I think Wendy Chong will also look specifically at children with rare planetary genetic disease.
Okay.
All right.
Well, thanks.
You know, you point out the difference between science and clinical medical care.
Because in science it's perfectly all right to say, I don't know.
We haven't done those experiments.
We haven't studied it.
In clinical medicine when a patient comes in and looks at you, you can't just say,
I don't know.
That's right.
That's what I went into science.
That's right.
No, nothing.
You have to be able to find that.
You're saying, I don't know.
But I know how we can proceed.
That's right.
And that's what you've heard.
In other words, you have to accept the fact that there's still an awful lot we don't know.
But you also have to recognize that there are people who are interested in pursuing this
and who will keep pursuing it, because otherwise you will die by Google.
Any other questions?
No?
Okay.
Thank you.
Thank you.
