I just want your attention for a moment.
We are going to do a very un-psycho-analytic thing and guilt you all into filling out
these surveys.
It's a very important part of what we're doing and part of the grant that was given
for these events depends on our having enough individuals filling out these surveys before
and after the round table.
So we're going to distribute some more of these and please just over the next couple
of minutes make an effort just to fill them out if you can.
Thanks.
And we also have some more programs available that gives more information on the question
for today and the participants.
Not too high because then keep banging on me.
So tell us about it.
Next slide.
Yes,azac.
I think it's...
Is it too heavy?
It's like a couple of minutes.
No more.
No more.
If we're in, Julie looks, we can get more people kind.
Exactly.
Okay, we're going to get started.
I'm Rob Penzer.
I'm the Associate Director of the Heel
of the Heel
coming today.
On Saturday, December 6, our poetry series continues
with French surrealism, a revolution of the mind.
Poet visual artist and helix executive committee member
Anne Marille Levine
applications program at the Metropolitan Museum of Art,
excuse me, Mark Polizotti, and poet and translator,
Bill Zavatsky.
Then on December 18th, we continue our Templeton Foundation
funded roundtable series with the search for immortality,
with philosopher Martin Hagland, astronomer Chris Impey,
poet essayist and senior editor at the New Republic,
Adam Kirsch, professor of psychology,
Sheldon Solomon, and Jungian psychoanalyst,
and Buddhist, Polly Young, Eisendrath.
And there will be more Templeton Foundation events
coming in the following year, as well as
non-Templeton events.
So watch our website for further announcements.
Now I'd like to introduce our esteemed participants
in today's roundtable, Complexity and Emergence.
And for the benefit of the viewing audience,
could each of you raise your hand when I say your name?
Mark Alford is professor and chairman
of the physics department at Washington University
in St. Louis.
He performs research at the intersection
of particle physics, nuclear physics, and astrophysics,
focusing on the theater and stars and the ultra dense matter
that exists inside them.
After receiving his PhD from Harvard,
he held research positions at UC Santa Barbara, Cornell,
the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, and MIT,
and then a lectureship at Glasgow University.
In 2005, he received an outstanding junior investigator
award from the US Department of Energy.
For the last five years, he has taught Washington University's
physics and society course, introducing the non-science
students to the methods of physics and their application
to questions that confront us as citizens of a developed
and developing world.
So I'll see you Khrushberg, a theoretical particle
physicist and cosmologist is visiting assistant professor
of physics and astronomy at Vassar.
She obtained her PhD in Chicago, where
she studied the physics of the early universe.
She previously obtained a master's degree
in mind, brain, and education at Harvard,
and undergraduate and master's degrees
in astrophysics at Dartmouth.
Her current research explores the interface between the mind
and brain in the context of physics problem solving.
She is a meditation practitioner and teaches in the Vassar.
Let me see if I get this right.
Vassarayana Buddhist lineage of Shogyam,
Trungpa Rinpoche, and Dr. Reginald Ray.
Timothy O'Connor, his professor of philosophy at Indiana University
Bloomington, and a member of its cognitive sciences program.
He specializes in metaphysics, philosophy of mind,
and philosophy of religion.
He received his doctorate in philosophy from Cornell
and has held year-long research fellowships
at the universities of Notre Dame, St. Andrews, and Oxford
at 150 lectures in 20 countries.
He's published over 70 scholarly articles
and is the author of two books, Persons and Causes,
the Metaphiscals Pre-Will, and Theism and Ultimate
Explanation of the Necessary Shape of Contingency.
He's now writing a third, provisionally
titled Thinking About Faith, Philosophy, Science,
and Christian Belief.
He also has edited or co-edited six volumes
of scholarly articles, most recently
Religious Faith and Intellectual Virtue.
He is currently an independent disciplinary emergence
project at Durham University.
Raul Robodon is an associate professor
in the departments of systems biology
and biomedical informatics at the Columbia University College
of Physicians and Surgeons.
Previously, he was a and Helen Schulien member
of the Simon Center for System Biology
at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.
He obtained his PhD in theoretical physics
at the Universidad Autonama de Madrid,
and from 2001 to 2003, he was a fellow
at the theoretical physics division at CERN,
the European Organization for Nuclear Research in Geneva.
In 2003, he joined the theoretical physics group
at the Institute for Advanced Study,
and in 2006, the systems biology group
in the School of Natural Sciences at that same institution.
His current interests focus on patterns of evolution
in biological systems, in particular RNA viruses and cancer,
next generation sequencing technologies,
pathogen discovery and emerging viruses,
and data mining electronic health records.
Caleb Scharf is the director of astrobiology
at Columbia University.
Born and educated in England, he received his Bachelor of Science
in Physics from Durham University,
and his PhD in astronomy from the University of Cambridge.
Following a National Academy's Fellowship
at the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
and postdoctoral work at the Space Telescope Science
Institute in Maryland, he has been based at Columbia
with extensive research covering cosmology,
high-energy astrophysics, and exoplanetary science,
and he currently leads efforts to understand
the nature of exoplanets and the environment suitable
for life in the universe.
He's the winner of the 2011 Chamblis Award
from the American Astronomical System,
textbook, Extra Solar Planets and Astrobiology,
and the Guardian, cited with high praise,
his life-unbounded blog at Scientific American,
as well as his latest book, The Copernicus Complex.
He has written for, served as guest or consulted
for the New York Times, The Wall Street Journal,
Nature, New Yorker, BBC, PBS, and still other publications
and media outlets, too numerous to mention.
Now, our panelists will begin.
Hi.
Well, perhaps I could start us off with a very general question.
What do we mean by the notion of emergence?
Emergence is back in vogue in discussion
about the nature of the physical world.
But it seems to me that different people
may mean different things.
There's a very uncontroversial sense of emergence,
which simply means that there are levels
of organization in the natural world that involve patterns
that are distinct and inclined from lower level patterns
of explanation and behavior and structure.
In that sense, it's uncontroversial
that there's emergence.
Chemistry isn't identical to fundamental physics.
Biology is not identical in form in its concepts,
its characteristic patterns of explanation to chemistry,
let alone psychology, further still,
from any of these fundamental sciences.
So in that sense, it's uncontroversial
that there's emergence.
The controversial question then is,
how do these different levels of explanation,
levels of organization, connect to one another?
And so I thought I'd just kick it off
by asking you to weigh in on that question.
We'd like to begin.
I don't mind taking that.
I guess one of the things that interests me
about the concept of emergence is this question
of causality.
And if you have bottom up causality
so that if you understand the fundamentals of the electrons
and the atoms that you can in principle
put the follows and the properties of any emergent
phenomena are ultimately predictable
from those simpler phenomena.
All this idea of bottom down causality
where the emergent phenomena alters, I guess in a sense,
it means altering the physical environment
in which more fundamental processes play out
and they then play out in a different way.
You fundamental processes emerge.
And I guess as a physicist, I tend to think
of things like superconductivity and stuff like that
where the structure of some solid substance
that will become superconducting alters
the fundamental characteristics of electrons.
It can form this maybe old physics
but koopa pairs and things that then have different properties.
And of course, so I guess for me,
that's a really interesting question,
something I have no answer to.
And I'm completely ignorant of this notion
of causality operating in two different directions,
perhaps even simultaneously.
So I think I can maybe build up your comments here
as an early universe cosmologist.
I tend to take things back to the beginning.
And something that I think about a lot is what,
so we think about the universe itself
as a complex emergent system.
If that's the case, it seems like we can go back in time
and sort of upward in energy
and think about what the conditions were
in the early universe that allowed
for a complex system to emerge.
Because in one sense, from a theoretical point of view,
we would expect that the universe was formed
in a symmetric state in which photons created
particle, antiparticle pairs and vice versa.
And if that had been the case,
then the universe would just be a sort of soup of photons
with a proton, antiproton pairs sort of here and there.
And there would be no complexity
and there would be no structure.
And it is because there were these violations
of early in the universe
that we actually have a complex system to talk about.
So I think that's where I tend to go
when I hear the word emergence
in the context of the physical universe
is way back and really thinking about conservation laws
and broken symmetries.
Okay, so what I find interesting is that emergence
is used in opposite ways.
The strong type of emergence
that Kayla was just talking about
is used to say that the whole is more
than the sum of the parts.
But then there's the weak kind of emergence
where you're saying that you can explain the behavior,
complex interesting behavior of something larger
in terms of its constituents.
And then it's got a sort of reductive feel to it
and you're using emergence, the same sort of idea
to say, well, there isn't really anything new here
to talk about, it looks interesting,
but it's actually just the same lego blocks,
arranged differently.
And so you can, depending on how someone's using
the word emergence, they can be cutting
in very different directions.
Yeah, one question that they have is,
in this definition, for example,
does it mean that the different levels
they're independent?
I mean, obviously, if the atomic physics is different,
so the physics is different, the chemistry
is going to be different.
So it's not going to be completely dependent
on the previous level.
So there from the, I mean, introduction is the way,
I mean, there are certain things that depend
on the other level.
So it is not completely new, completely free emergence,
I mean, it's dependent on the other ones,
the same way that economy depends on the biology,
I mean, you can not.
So if there is something that is completely new
that appears on a different level,
it's because we don't have the power within the theory
or within our machines or our simulations
to predict that there is something new
or it's because there is something really new there.
Well, if I could jump in there.
I think you're putting your finger
on a fundamental question, which is,
does the very idea that the universe is built up
out of some more fundamental stuff entail
that the only kind of emergence
that one could expect in the world
is this week's or that Mark was talking about?
Because of course we believe that complex objects
in our universe depend in some very strong sense
on their fundamental constituents
and the forces that govern the binding of those constituents.
And I take it that the person proposing
a stronger notion of emergence will say
that while there is that dependency,
you can't have the complex system
if the underlying stuff isn't there functioning
in the way that it does, still there may be certain properties
of the whole that are not wholly fixed by
the underlying arrangement and propensities
of the fundamental stuff.
So could there be in some sense
that you had a threshold level of organized complexity
and then a new feature of the whole appears
that's not a simple structural feature
like the shape of this table, but it exerts
some kind of causal influence subsequently.
Going back to the question of broken symmetry.
So if you have something that these
there are different solutions for the practical problem
and you choose one, I mean, because he started
got what happened or something like that.
Then I don't know, I would not say
that this is kind of emergent.
I mean,
would not, yeah, okay, well, question is
should we be thinking of emergence
in the same way in every context?
There's lots of complex system sciences
at various level.
You're talking about a very fundamental
or kind of big picture that cosmological distribution
of matter or something of that sort.
That's one very interesting area where
the question of emergence arises,
but then it arises in more specific kinds of sciences,
self-organizing systems, biological properties,
psychological properties, consciousness, right?
The mysterious nature of our own subjective awareness
as persons and perhaps the way we should think about
this, the idea of emergence in these contexts
could it possibly be different?
Is it an empirical question or is it
a purely conceptual question?
That is, might empirical data suggest
there's a stronger form of emergence going on
in relation to this specific phenomena,
whereas Marx's notion of weak emergence
is perfectly adequate in abstract terms
to capture what's going on in some other domain.
What do you think?
As a scientist, you just come with an a priori
presumption of weak emergence.
I think scientists always get to have weak emergence
because they always want to say that everything
everybody else is just a game with,
according to the rules and containing the ingredients
that the scientist, preferably the physicists,
lay down at the very beginning and then the people
at the high level or special scientists, whatever you want
to call them, would like to fight the reductionism
and the ultimate form of fighting it
is what you were just saying, where
you have some structure that emerges,
some high level structure that actually supposedly plays
a role, a causal influence.
It actually does something.
And it's not just all the swarm of molecules of which
is made up, all secretly, all doing stuff that somehow adds up
to something, right?
What you're hinting at is something beyond that,
not only is it not obviously obtainable
from the sum of the parts, it actually isn't.
That's what you would, that's the holy grail.
Is that the fair?
Yeah, and then the question is, is it for empirical reasons
that we might doubt there is such a strongly emerging
phenomena or is it just a kind of working hypothesis that
our native, our default setting as scientists,
when we approach a domain, is that ultimately there's
a kind of ability, so it's at best, weaker emergence.
Well, the default is certainly going
to be being able to do business as usual.
So I think you'd need some pretty dramatic evidence
to push people away from the idea that ultimately it's
all the standard ingredients operating according
to the standard rules.
And what we can think about would be interesting,
would be what if such evidence showed up?
What if you found something where it looked
as if you really couldn't, some actual phenomenon,
that you really couldn't explain it
by using the standard model of particle physics
or using whatever you usually did?
How would we react?
Yeah, what can be the best example of these strong?
How do you distinguish it from simply being ignorant?
Well, that's fundamental.
Well, so some philosophers and others
will point to conscious awareness,
subjective experience that we're all having right now.
As we think about the nature of the universe,
we seem to have this direct immediate apprehension
of our own conscious states and the qualities
of our experience, the looks of colors, the sounds,
given off by moving bodies.
These categories have no place in a physical description
of the world around us.
And yet they are an aspect of the way
we experience the world.
We think that we have a very good understanding
of how the neurons work and they are connected
and all these things.
We would not be able to predict something like that.
The Australian philosopher Frank Jackson
proposes, you know, a contemplate.
Philosophers are interested always
in the end game scenario, right?
Empirical science is ongoing.
So what we have to do is there's
some sort of strong reason for thinking
that no matter what the future development of science, which
of course is unknown to us right now,
there could not be a thorough explication
of conscious experience in physical terms.
And his argument is, you know, so positive,
we have a neuroscientist, call her Mary.
And Mary knows everything about the neuroscientific processes
underlying color experience.
So she knows what's going on in the visual cortex.
She knows how the light information comes into the eye,
how it triggers what's going on in the brain.
And she can do all that in neuroscientific terms,
enough so that if she sees a computer read out of somebody's
brain, she can tell you about the intrinsic character
of the experience.
But suppose Mary herself has never had color experience.
Suppose Mary grew up in a black and white room
and was imprisoned there by her diabolical parents.
But then she escapes as an adult.
And she suddenly goes out, she sees a bright red rose.
Her first ever non-monochromatic color experience.
And she says to herself, so that's
what it's like to experience redness.
It seems like she's learning something new,
not about the physical world, but about the character
of color experience, the intrinsic subjective character
of color experience.
And it would appear that simply having a picture
of the structure and dynamics of the brain
is not going to disclose that intrinsic quality.
A congenitally blind color scientist
can know everything about the structural arrangements
of the brain and the dynamical processes
that govern the unfolding of that.
But it seems intuitively to us is going to necessarily
lack acquaintance with the intrinsic character
of that color experience, some kind
of intrinsic property of the color experience.
Yeah, I can imagine the same experiment
and the experiences that are not humans, for example.
And then you don't need to postulate anything
like a consciousness for understanding
the reaction of this and the behavior of this animal,
for example.
Oh, sorry.
Can you hear me now?
Yes.
So if you take another animal that is not human,
and then you do a similar experiment,
that's probably more ethical.
So then, probably the assignment would realize
that they have some experience or not
being cautious of doing that.
But it's probably the same behavior.
I mean, we don't need to postulate something
like a consciousness at these points.
But don't we know that we ourselves are conscious?
Isn't that something given to us before any engaging
in science that's given to us more immediately
than anything else, that I myself am a conscious being
that I'm having experiences of a certain sort.
I'm wondering whether what you're suggesting is,
well, this consciousness notion is something
that mature science is going to do away with.
We can explain everything in terms of structure and dynamics.
And so no need to postulate consciousness.
But the consciousness doesn't seem to be something
that we postulate.
It seems to be something that we start with.
It's part of our data.
Yeah, my only thing is that if, I mean, it is the question.
If we forget about there is something like consciousness,
I think the world can be exactly explainable in the same way
or not explainable in the same way.
I mean, if there is a person here,
if that is not conscious or something like that,
then it can't react in similar way.
Who's the zombie?
I can't react in the same way.
I think there's a more fundamental problem
with what you're saying, which is that you're
sort of a first person thing.
You're saying there's this first person thing
that I have this conscious experience.
And could science ever capture that?
No, because science is inherently third person.
But actually, all forms of inquiry.
And then you could even say all forms of knowledge
are inherently third person.
But there's really almost nothing that you can say.
You have that experience.
You could say you have the experience.
But beyond that, it doesn't seem like there's anything
you can do or say.
So supposing that the strong emergentists dream came true.
And there were these phenomena.
And when somebody was angry, something
happened in the synapses of their brain
that wasn't because of other synapses firing.
It's coming from God knows where.
It seems like it's coming from outside the system.
OK, so now we've seen this sort of thing before in science.
We've had processes that seem to not conserve energy.
And we postulated the neutrino.
And you have little pieces of metal moving around on paper
with nothing touching them.
And you postulate a magnetic field.
So we'll go in there.
We'll postulate some other thing.
We'll try and explain what's going on.
We'll try and understand it.
All that's going to be third person.
And in fact, even a psychologist
is explicitly investigating feelings.
It's all third person.
You're investigating other people's feelings.
You're investigating how they behave, what they want, what
they do.
Psychoanalysis is inherently third person.
It's very hard, as far as I can see, to think up.
The first person thing that seems like the motivation
for emergence is actually a form of knowledge.
Another thing I think in science, one of the things
that we postulate that there is a magnetic field, for example,
there are some predictions that can be done there.
And going back to my point is that if we have an animal
and we want to know, is there a test
that we can do to the animal?
To know if this animal or this person is conscious or not,
we thought postulate in the existence of the consciousness.
I think we can exactly predict the same behavior.
Good.
Maybe we should just pursue a bit longer,
because I still think there's a little bit
about the case of consciousness.
But I think it's a special case.
So I think eventually we'll want to transition
to talking about other forms of complexity.
So the reason I say it seems like a special case is precisely
because in other domains, like you've been both
are indicating right now, it's when we get puzzling phenomena
that is observable physical phenomena
that are current inventory, or physical inventory of properties
and in forces doesn't seem adequate to capture
that we then have to broaden out our physical
understanding, so electromagnetism in the 19th century.
In the case of consciousness, it's
not the behavior of consciousness that
leads us to think we're going to need
some new fundamental explanatory principle.
It's in the intrinsic character.
We have this acquaintance with consciousness,
and then it's left for future theorizing to say,
what difference does it make?
Is it epiphenomenal?
Is it such that it's just there, but it's
an offshoot of the intrinsic character
of neurophysiological processes, but it
makes no fundamental difference to explaining
the behavior of the conscious person,
or does it impact, have an impact?
That's still an open question.
Once you take on board, consciousness
is a new fundamental kind of feature.
So it's a very sad taste, and Mark was saying,
but from the point of view of theoretical science,
to make progress in order to gain knowledge,
we have to take a third personal point of view.
And I think that's right.
In every other domain, other than conscious experience,
itself, precisely because what we're theorizing about
is a first personal experiential kind of state.
So to try to understand the solidity of this table,
your first personal experience as an investigator
is irrelevant, provided you have enough experiential powers.
Maybe you're blind, maybe you're deaf.
You have certain limitations on your sensory apparatus,
but it provided you have enough in order
to understand the theory of physical bonding processes.
Matter.
It doesn't matter that you lack knowledge of what
it's like as a normally cited person to see the table.
You can still understand completely
the physical dynamics of the table
and why it's a relatively stable, solid object.
But conscious experience itself is the first person phenomena.
So if you say, well, we're going to leave that out
of the picture and just talk about the dynamics
of neurons in relevant portions of the brain,
well, you're leaving out precisely what
is being put forward to for explanation.
So it's a first personal phenomena intrinsically.
So this is maybe taking it in a slightly different direction,
but it's also because I'm a simple person
and I'm getting very confused with all these discussions
of conscious.
But one thing that pops into my head as you're talking,
and I think it relates to the first question,
what does emergence and complexity mean to you?
You're assuming, I think, or perhaps when people talk
about consciousness that everyone has the same type
of consciousness.
Now, if we say that consciousness comes
as an emergent phenomena from an extraordinarily complex
biological system, electrochemical signals and so on,
there's no guarantee that it's precisely the same for everyone.
There are enough neurons and synapses
that every individual human, every one of seven billion
minds, human minds that exist on this planet,
actually have something that's slightly different about them.
Now, in a statistical sense, we can do
tests to examine consciousness and our reactions
to whether that's a red rose or a black and white rose
and so on.
But that's kind of a statistical test.
It's not getting to the core of one of the reasons,
I guess what I'm trying to say is that one
of the reasons something like consciousness
may be such a slippery thing, apart from our innate relationship
to it, is it may be different all the time.
It's something that comes out of enormous complexity.
And the same is true of other emergent phenomena.
And this is one of the things we may be having a hard time
getting hold of is that there's stochasticity
in this whole process, that's random, that's everything.
It's going to be slightly different in every single instance.
And perhaps that is one of the things
that is making this difficult for us to grow.
It's certainly making it difficult for me to grow.
But maybe that's just because I'm very simplistic
about these things.
Does that trigger any thoughts?
Yeah, I think it's not what you're saying.
I think it's not difficult to understand
because it's like planets which you understand very well.
Well, I don't.
OK, which come in.
Millions of different varieties and a very hard to pin down.
When you say everyone's consciousness
is different from each other.
Well, maybe.
Well, I don't think there's even a maybe.
It's not even clear there's a question.
There is no way.
There is a way to compare this planet to that planet.
Even if it's difficult, you can send the probe,
measure the spectrum.
There is no way, even in principle,
to compare your consciousness with anyone else's.
We don't even know what the question means.
What do we do to answer it?
I think that's what's actually so slippery and hard about it.
Not that it's very difficult, practically.
So my present conscious experience
is not just open to investigators to all look at,
verify that it has certain properties,
and then move on to the next subject,
and then do the comparison.
Each of us at the end of the day,
if we take the fundamentally of conscious experience seriously,
we're stuck with saying all we ever have,
any individual researcher has direct observational access
to is her own conscious experience.
And so then one could worry that there's
much greater variation in conscious experience,
even for people similarly poised, physically,
looking out at the same angle, how much variation is there.
It looks like we just have to make indirect guesses based
on physical similarity.
The brain scientists tell us about processes that are going on,
and they're being commonalities of types,
that there's perhaps no guarantee that that directly corresponds
to commonality of intrinsic conscious properties.
Yeah.
Well, I wonder whether we could shift from consciousness,
and maybe I could pass the baton, since I'm a philosopher
of mind, but there's all these other interesting physical
phenomena.
So I wonder if somebody could run with a form put out there
for the rest of us some form of complexity
in a domain that you study and with it.
So I think, for example, yes, that we were discussing before.
One interesting one is, for example,
something like the origin of life.
I mean, if knowing the fundamental physics,
laws, and the chemistry, and everything,
if we could predict that there is something like life,
and if the life would be in this form,
or there are several forms, or something like that.
I mean, obviously, life exists, and it can be measured.
So it's a well-defined problem.
So I think here we have an expert that
can give an opinion that is a little bit more solid than mine.
Yeah, I mean, I think origins of life
is an excellent example, because we've built.
What's interesting about the origins of life question
just to go back to very sort of practical terms
is that it's a bit like defining life.
There's a joke that goes on in circles
where if you stop a random scientist on the street
and you ask them, tell me what life is.
Define that.
You get a different answer each time.
And one of the excuses that we come up with,
well, life is a sort of emergent phenomenon.
It's a complex thing, and so, et cetera, et cetera.
But this directly impacts the quest
to understand the origin point of at least life here on Earth.
Is there a clearly defined origin point?
So we start to explore this, and we look, perhaps,
at the nature of biomolecules, how they might come
together and chain reactions to reduce polymer-like molecules
that then fold and do other things, and so on.
We might look at, we might look for origins of life
by studying inorganic templates on the Earth.
So, for example, looking at hydrothermal vent systems,
whether there are electrical and chemical gradients
that look remarkably similar to things
that we see across cell walls.
And the interesting thing about the origins of life question
is that much like defining life, there are probably,
right now, 100 theories out there,
or 100 investigations, each is different
than trying to answer what was the origin point of life.
And I think what's becoming clear from that, at least,
my mind, is that it's not unreasonable to think of life,
also, as some kind of emergent phenomena.
It's an emergent property of chemistry.
But it may have had multiple origin points.
And so this adds another layer to the issue of complexity
and emergence.
Maybe there are some phenomena that
are initiated in many different ways simultaneously.
And it's the combination of all those that come together.
So I think in origins of life research,
there's something that we might learn by understanding
what really is emergence.
And is there, sorry to come back to this.
And I'm a reductionist.
Don't get me wrong.
But I do believe that there are feedbacks, feedback loops.
And I think, a sort of intermediate way
of thinking about this bottom up to top down causality
is that there are feedback loops that are initiated.
You have an emergent phenomena, and it influences what's
happening at a more fundamental level.
But there is feedback, because at more fundamental level,
they turn influences the emergent phenomena.
And there may be stuff like that happening
in questions of origins of life.
So I know it's a little vague and nebulous.
But yeah, origins of life.
If there's an emergent phenomena that we're really interested
in, it's life.
So I don't know.
Does anyone have any feelings or thoughts about that?
Is life an emergent phenomenon?
You want to vote?
Well, there's only four of us.
Anyone is going to disagree with that.
But is it?
Then what type of emergent phenomena?
Yeah, so that's a good question.
I think weekly emergent, we would all probably go for.
Because there isn't this sort of classic argument
that it has to be something other than that.
So it could all come from the dance of molecules.
So that's probably enough for people
to say that's the default hypothesis
until you kick me off it.
Yeah, it's interesting that in the history of science,
in the late 19th and early 20th century,
there was a lot of very serious scientists
who thought that life was a strongly emergent phenomena
that they thought, well, just look.
Look at a living thing.
Look at the dynamical principles.
There's a kind of teleology there
that you don't see in non-living matter.
But that kind of perspective sort of completely
fell by the board with the rise of the DNA analysis of life
and coming to understand that one thing we know,
life is a very complex phenomena.
So this idea that it's a simple quality that just sort of appears
when matter is arranged in the right sort of form.
That's not taking seriously.
And yet it's interesting that you're
wanting to bring back in the question of,
in terms of the origin point of life.
So I think there are several things
that I think one should take this idea seriously also.
I mean, it's amazing that when life, I mean,
when the Earth was habitable, I mean,
a few million years or not even a thousand million years
after that, it was after that we started having science of life.
So it was very, very immediate that this happened.
So I don't know.
I mean, we have only one example.
So basically, we have two solutions to the problem.
One no life in some problem in some planets
and one life in ours.
So it's only one.
But I mean, it's interesting that it happened so fast.
So I think it could be that we don't understand exactly how
to connect the dots of something that is starting
from a soup of molecules.
They still have organized to arrive to something
that is kind of life-like.
And we don't know if the solution is unique as the one
that we have, or they have many different solutions
in each planet.
I mean, perhaps in a few years, we
will have a collection of planets
in a star wars reach of those with different creatures.
There is a request that you all have to evolve.
Oh, I say sorry.
Yeah.
So are any of us here fairly knowledgeable
about more general self-replicating systems that
are non-living and does this shed light perhaps on?
There's a lot of science going on,
treating of simpler non-living systems,
but nevertheless, share with living systems
this self-replicating dynamics and apparently
a kind of spontaneous emergence, but probably
of a weak form of emergence where we can actually
understand very well the underlying physical principles
that govern these systems.
And I just wonder for somebody who studies living systems
themselves, which are much more complex,
whether this is something that is potentially
going to shed light and provide the answer to your question.
I think people, I mean, correct me if I'm wrong,
back in, what's it, the 1970s, 1980s,
people got fascinated by cellular or dominant, right?
These little essentially computer codes
that had very simple rules.
And suddenly you could get all this complexity emerging
and so on.
I don't know what people work on today in that area.
Is there some particular field you have in mind where people
are?
Well, I just know that there are very
simple physical mechanisms that exhibit.
I don't know a great deal about it.
That's why I was wondering if any of you could speak more
to it.
But they can be studied.
So these aren't just computer simulations,
like cognitive life.
These are actual physical systems that
exhibit self-replication of a kind.
I think you'd have to have Stephen Wolfram to have that done
in detail.
So I think that I'd like to make a point about evolution,
actually, in connection with this.
And that is that, so just as there's
people who would like mind to be something more than the physical
body, there's many people who would like the development
of life culminating in us to be more than just random variation
plus natural selection.
And there's an overstatement that scientists are prone to
in this, that we have biology and we have a mechanism
by which you can see how random variation plus natural
selection could give you complicated organisms like us.
That's true.
What you often see scientists do is convert that into a very
different statement, which is we know that random mutations
plus natural selection gave rise to us.
In other words, they go from random mutations plus natural
selection would be enough to that's actually what happened.
We know that all the mutations that actually happened in
the history of the universe to produce us were random.
Those are two very distant statements.
And the second one is completely beyond what we know.
Of course, we don't know that all those mutations were
random.
We have no idea.
But you often find scientists saying that.
And then you get this big collision that people say, oh,
you're eliminating God, or you're eliminating something.
And I think as scientists, here physicists lecturing the
biologists, how dare I?
I think we should be careful what we say.
We say what we know.
And we don't say more than we know.
I think that's a good point.
I think it's very difficult sometimes.
I know that just the use of language as such that you
find yourself in a corner and you'll say something
after what you go.
No, I shouldn't have said that because I've opened myself
up to other things.
Yeah, it's often remarked that in physics, we had Newton,
and then we had Einstein.
At the state of play at the end of the 19th century, people
thought physics is basically done.
It's just mop up work.
And then we get this radical revolution in physical
understanding.
And as a result, physicists are perhaps more cautious
and tentative of their endorsement of even very
well-confirmed theories.
Biology's had its Newton in Darwin, but it hasn't yet
had its Einstein that potentially that could be out,
which isn't to say Darwin goes away, but it might say that
there's more to the picture here than simply this very
powerful explanatory mechanism that Darwin put forth.
I think that's true.
But this goes to the question of scientists inevitably
in formulating theories, they generalize from a limited
amount of data work with the theory and say, absent to some
reason to think otherwise, we think this perspective
generalizes.
So physicists confirm particle physics, basic dynamics of
how particles interact by treating relatively small
scale systems.
And I'm looking at you as a ocean, please correct me when I
say something that's just false.
But as I understand it, right?
And then we assume that, well, of course, the universe
involves, I don't know, 10 to the 90th power particles,
perhaps, but it's essentially just the same thing writ large,
just an unimaginably large number of interactions.
But the same principles that we observe in these systems
we've carefully isolated applies quite generally.
And that goes to the question of emergence, maybe at some
point of structural complexity out in the wild, outside of
our carefully constructed isolated systems, things
function a bit differently.
And then similarly, I take that to be the point Mark was
promoting with evolutionary explanations.
Yes, we do know this kind of mechanism is at play in the
biological realm.
But whether that's fully capturing what's going on is an
open question.
If you observe mutations that are always random, couldn't
you draw that conclusion?
Who's to say they're random?
Random means we don't have an explanation for why they did
this and not that.
Well, OK, so an explanation might come along at some point.
All you can say is you can't explain why the mutations
did what they did.
So you are saying the concept of randomness is not valid at
all.
I'm saying it's a non-statement.
It's not a statement.
It's a statement that we don't know what happened there.
It's not a statement that we do know that nothing
interesting happened there.
So the fact that you can predict that there will be more
of those things happening in a fashion quote-unquote
random is not what you're saying.
Because this argument that we don't know, there's nothing
that we can state where we can say for sure that we know.
There's always we don't know in everything.
Well, the interesting thing about an evolution thing is
that you don't need to know.
Random, in other words, you don't need to imprint anything
on these variations.
If they were random, combine them with natural selection,
that would be good enough.
That doesn't need to be a purpose or pattern in them.
But that doesn't mean that there actually wasn't one in
the mutations that happened that led to us.
And of course, if you're a scientist, you say, why would
you bother postulating some crazy extra thing?
And yes, fine.
You don't have to.
That's the whole point.
But you're not forbidden to.
There isn't evidence to disprove it, right?
Just a point of clarification.
My understanding that the way evolutionary biologists use
the notion of randomness in terms of genetic mutations is
simply that there can be a very predictable, in fact,
quantifiable rate of variation for different types of genes.
Might be one in four million or whatever
to do a digital gene type.
So there's predictability there.
And the term randomness is used to say that the change is
they don't, there's no bias towards favorable change
towards the organism.
In that sense, it's random.
I think what we know from the data is that.
Yes.
What we know from the data is that the mutations, I mean,
their distribution of mutations, not all the mutations,
are created equal.
They happen in particular flavors.
And this is organism-dependent.
We know very well also.
We know a lot of things about what is the molecular understanding,
I mean, how these things happen.
I mean, if there is the amination of a particular base,
we know what is the chemistry that happens there.
We know many of the enzymes that are down in there.
And there is a huge research.
I mean, in cancer, for example, one of the things
that we are doing.
We know that cancers are produced by random mutations.
We have evolution happens all around us, in our bodies.
And then we don't understand.
We cannot predict exactly what is the mutation.
But we understand very well what other mechanisms that
happened.
We understand some of the distributions.
We understand many of the things that are there.
And we have a lot of data.
You understand by descending to the bio-physical level.
Yes.
It's not a part.
We cannot predict what is going to be the base
that is going to be mutated.
But we can understand what are the mechanisms that are playing
there.
What do you think about the random?
Randomness.
I think randomness is critical.
We wouldn't be sitting here if it went for randomness.
It's interesting.
In my field, one of the things that we come up against,
I'm engaged with many people in the quest
to understand whether or not there's life elsewhere
in the universe.
And I'm approaching it in a very practical way.
We're looking for environments beyond the earth
where life might exist, or life that we at least
could recognize.
And I think one of the interesting questions
that we haven't really addressed yet is even if, let's
suppose that the biochemistry that exists here on the earth
and has existed for most of the last 4 billion years
is indeed universal.
And that actually, the evidence suggests
that maybe correctly look out into the universe
as astronomers.
We find carbon-based molecules everywhere.
It's the dominant type of chemistry in the universe.
Carbon-based molecules are forming out in interstellar space
over billions of years.
70% of all the molecules you see floating between the stars
are organic molecules.
It's just the chemistry of the universe.
That's the way it is.
So at least very simplistically, you
could perhaps connect the dot to say that there's not
a coincidence that life here is based around carbon chemistry.
But what are the possible outcomes?
Let's suppose origin events for life, you mentioned this,
we think that life got going pretty rapidly here
on the earth following the final formation.
The epoch of the planet.
And statistically, it really doesn't tell you much
because it's only one data point.
So it's a little dangerous to say, oh, it started quickly here.
And therefore, maybe it happens easily elsewhere.
That's a very dangerous thing to say.
But I'm coming to the point about random.
That's one of the interesting things
that I don't think any of us have really tackled yet
because we don't know how to tackle it
is even if the biochemistry is the same everywhere,
wherever life occurs in the universe,
assuming it does elsewhere, the biochemistry is
basically the same.
How different can the outcomes be?
How random is this?
I mean, OK, we're used to thinking of what life on earth,
we have single-celled organisms, bacteria and archaea.
That seems kind of fundamental.
You have a cell structure.
You have the DNA and the cell structure,
et cetera, lots of things followed
from that, and then at some point, complex cells like ours
came along.
Is it not clear to me at all that even things like bacteria
are a necessary outcome of biochemistry?
Maybe you could do it differently
and have a completely different evolutionary history.
And so in that sense, randomness, I think,
comes in to this quest to look for life elsewhere in the universe
because for all we know, we're staring at it,
and it's the same biochemistry.
It just turned out so radically differently
that we're having a hard time spotting it.
Now, I can qualify that statement.
So in that sense, randomness plays a huge role
in questions I'm interested in.
It also plays, I mean, just to come to something
not to do with life, just in planetary systems,
what we've realized over really the, well,
I guess we started seeing clues to this
before we had discovered planets around other stars,
which we have now done.
In the last 20 years, we've discovered planets
around other stars, and they are abundant.
What we've also learned is that planetary systems turn out
different every time.
We have this sort of imprint in our heads
that the solar system was the prototype,
the template for how planetary systems should appear.
You have the little rocky planets close to the star.
You have your gas giant planets.
You have other things out there,
and it all sort of made sense.
And we've had to sort of tear that up
and throw that out the window, because it isn't true.
Planetary systems are inherently non-linear,
and the outcome of the formation processes of planets
will spit out different stuff every single time,
incredibly diverse.
And that's something that is an enormous challenge for us.
And essentially, it's randomness.
The core is randomness, non-linearity, complexity.
And I think, for me, one of the things that weighs on me
or that I have no good answer is we still think that way
when we're looking for life elsewhere.
We're still strongly imprinted with the notion, well, yes,
we know the details will be different.
Maybe it's a planet of chickens, or maybe it's
it's a planet of octopus or something.
But the truth is, we don't even know that.
It could be extraordinary.
Maybe.
I don't know.
Maybe you have.
I would be interested if anyone has an opinion
that somehow biochemistry and life
is going to sort of converge on similar forms
and similar mechanisms that we have here on Earth.
Well, this matter is debated, yes, in theoretical biology.
So Stephen J. Gould, a famous popular science writer,
famously said, if you're rewound the tape of evolution
and let it play out again, under slightly divergent
initial circumstances, you'd get something completely different.
And I think I think he was thinking it was so completely
different.
OK.
But he tended to push this line.
But then you have Simon Conway Morris, who's famously,
I think he's off at Cambridge or Oxford, wanting to say,
no, actually, we have a lot of evidence for convergence
in evolution that certain types of solutions
to certain kinds of problems for organism types, like the mammalian
eye, I think, it's believed has evolved five times in the camera eye.
The camera eye, the form of it.
It's a neat solution to a certain kind of so-to-speak problem
from an evolutionary point of view.
Once you have organisms of a certain kind,
that they're going to move in that.
So there's a kind of landscape, a biased landscape,
if you like, of biological organisms
they're going to inevitably move in a certain direction.
So I think one proof that randomness is important in biology
is that you can prepare the experiment.
In the same conditions, the other thing
is that natural selection works in different conditions
and then these things change.
But if you prepare exactly the same conditions
and you take copies of an organism that is identical
and you put it in different plates,
and then you move it forward, you can
see that the mutations at the accumulate at the end,
they are different.
And then you give, I don't know, you give an experiment,
you give some type of aiotic or something like that.
Some of these survive, some of they don't.
So starting from identical initial conditions
and the outcome is different.
So this is done in the lab.
And then in that case, I think biology is random,
I mean, in this sense.
I mean, at least we cannot predict a priori
given the initial conditions who is going to be
resistant to the mitabiotic and who is not
of this bacterium that they're identical from the beginning.
So this is pushing back against the small global picture
that someone like my Morris has in mind.
As I understand it, so you're saying, look,
we can, in a small scale trajectory of evolution,
we can see it happening starting from slightly different
initial conditions, things going in very different directions.
What I'm doing is looking at evolution in real time.
So we work with viruses, for example.
I mean, viruses, they evolve every application,
they have a mutation, cancers.
This is evolution that's happening in real time.
And there are processes that accumulate mutations
and all these things.
And one of the things that is very clear,
I mean, especially in the last five years,
that now we're sequencing tons of cancers,
is that every patient that comes with the same type of cancer,
let's say a glioblastoma, for example,
they take different patients.
The amount of mutations, I mean, the mutations that happen,
they are different, each patient is a different constellation
of mutations.
So, and they start basically from similar conditions.
We don't know exactly what are the conditions,
but they have different paths.
I mean, some of the key players, some of the genes,
they are the same, but most of them, they don't.
So, and then the game.
What is the understanding, just randomness?
So understanding that each individual has a different...
The observation is that they are different.
And then cellophorrhaging, and the idea
is that there is a random process.
There are several biological processes
that can create mutations with different flavors.
And then these mutations happen random.
So probably if we take, we have like 10 to the 14 cells
in our body, each of the cells, they have different mutations.
Most of the mutations don't do anything.
But some of the mutations, they contribute to the growth
of the cell.
And then when you accumulate the right or the wrong combination
of mutations is when the whole clonal expansion happens.
And then when we sequence the tumor at the end,
what we have is a picture of what are the mutations
that are accumulated in the history of this particular clone.
And they are different.
I mean, these in cancers we know that it's there.
So in terms of complexity and the emergence idea,
so if you look at cancers as the end product,
as the complex outcome of what was happening,
then the final outcome is determined by events
that are all by mutations that are very different.
But the outcome is the same.
The outcome, I mean, one of the things
I have to be cautious with that, I mean,
one of the several mutations, they
are exactly the same in different patients.
And this is why, I mean, we are looking what is called,
I mean, in cancer genomics jargon.
This is this idea that if they are, for example,
in glioblastoma, they are around 50 mutations
in a particular patient, that they are protein changing
from that.
Most of them, they are passengers.
So they are mutations that they don't do anything.
They happen by random.
I mean, they are in the background.
So they don't contribute to the particular phenotype
to this growth.
And some of those, they are going to be drivers.
So the whole regal of the field is
trying to find of these 50, which are the ones that
are really important for the tumor.
The classical experiment or the classical method
is recurrence.
So if you see that, because you do the experiment,
you have many different people, each of those
with a different cancer.
And you see that there is a mutation in a gene,
let's say, P53.
And another patient, they have mutation in the same gene.
The probability that this is happened by random
into the independent individuals is very low.
And then you assess that this particular gene
could be important for cancer.
And then there are a lot of experimental follow-up,
trying to understand what are the molecular mechanisms
of how this particular alteration in that particular gene
could contribute to the cancer.
So that's a very standard method.
So could I ask perhaps the appearance of the driver,
type mutations thought that these two are just random.
And they just, once they're, they
tend to determine a phenotypic process,
a process observable of that.
So this is something about they keep showing up.
So without going into the debate of all of our state.
Is there something down random about that
in biological terms?
I mean, it depends on how you define random.
So there are several, for example.
I mean, if you go to the sun, then you
get some radiation.
And radiation, we know what is causing damage in some DNA.
And there are several chemical processes,
or smoking, or something.
I mean, these are things that are kind of processes
that in this background, they increment
the rate of certain type of mutations.
And these things contribute to those environmental factors.
By us.
By mutation.
So you have a distribution.
So you have the model that we work.
Is that we have a probability of changing their four bases.
And then, so you have, each of the four bases
can change to the other three.
So you can have a matrix of different possibilities.
So there's a distribution.
And this distribution is conditional on the environment
that you have, and the molecular mechanisms that
are beyond that.
So you can see, for example, just counting the mutations that
happened.
There are some of those that happened more frequently
than other ones.
And then, one of the things that is very interesting
is understanding, for example, if there
are patients that they have different mutation
patterns that other patients that can give you a clue
of what are the molecular mechanisms that
are acting at that particular set of patients.
So there are many questions there.
But the questions are very precise.
I mean, in the sense that you can measure things,
and then you have tons of data, and then you
can fit distributions.
And random means sampling from a particular distribution.
So it's not a fit uniform.
As a cosmologist listening to you,
I feel sort of jealous that you have so many systems
that you can study.
Because in cosmology, we have our one universe.
And I was thinking about this dependence
on initial conditions.
And this is such an essential point
when we think about the emergence of complexity
in the universe, which is that if the values of the fundamental
constants were slightly different,
we would have a very different universe.
And of course, the wonderful thing
about doing this kind of research today
is that we can study sort of imaginary universes
via computational analyses.
And we can see that if we were to change
the charge of the electron by a small fraction,
the universe would look completely different.
But how wonderful it would be to have all of these little
universes and a multiverse to study and see, well,
what fundamentally do we need to get this kind of emergent
phenomena in our universe is the way that you can study
the initial conditions in the DNA and the environment
that create this kind of the beginning of a cancer
tumor, for example.
Yeah, I think one of the things that is interesting
in biological systems, especially the ones that are
evolving very fast.
I mean, if you talk about human evolution,
or it's much harder, but something
that you can do in the lab is you can create a system,
change conditions, and then try to see
how the distributions, I mean, randomness
can be quantified in a particular system.
I mean, there's some distributions.
And how these distributions shift when
you change the parameters here.
And that's something that is very cool.
So I can see what you shifted from physics to biology.
But in the early universe, you have lots of spectrums
of fluctuation.
Right.
It's just that they all seem to give rise
to similar looking galaxies.
Is that a fair statement?
The primordial fluctuations.
Yeah.
The post-inflation.
Sure.
That they're different as different as different mutations.
And yet.
I don't know if I would say that those fluctuations
are as different as the sorts of things
that we talk about in biology.
I think what we're talking about in the early universe
are fluctuating the original quantum field.
These conditions then just give rise
to these slight density perturbations.
And then those density perturbations
evolve with the expanding cooling universe
to produce gravitational wells that
tend to then produce galaxies.
So I don't know if they're as different statistically
as that system.
But I don't know.
It could be convinced otherwise.
Well, so he's got four rungs in his ladder.
And he can put them in different orders.
And you've got this random field that
can have a different value at each point in space
across light years.
It seems so bad.
It's just interesting that you get very similar looking
galaxies coming out of it.
Is that right, though?
All galaxies kind of brothers?
I mean, galaxies are quite similar in a sense.
I mean, they're different or slightly different
evolutionary histories.
But they are similar, certainly, in their properties.
I'm just thinking back to these primordial density
fluctuations, because what we find, of course, is that the early
universe is incredibly homogeneous and isotropic.
I mean, it's an incredibly homogeneous system.
And then we have these.
If we look at it from the point of view of temperature,
temperature fluctuations on the order of one part in 100,000,
those are the level of the fluctuations.
And those little fluctuations are enough
to give rise to this very interesting looking
and beautiful looking universe.
So I don't know if we can compare those with the base pairs,
those tiny little temperature fluctuations.
But on the very large scale, the universe continues
to look homogeneous and isotropic on the scale
sort of beyond galaxies.
Superclusters, I suppose.
So it continues just not sure if it's so different
on the small scale.
So could we affect the evolution of the universe?
I mean, that would be the ultimate closure, right,
where you have complicated things get rise to life.
And then life goes back and changes the whole.
So in practice, you mean not only?
Well, let's dream.
But the evolution of the whole universe
or some part of it.
Sure.
Could we create a baby universe?
I think we're going to have to start
to define universe carefully if we're going to ask that question.
Choose whatever definition makes it interesting.
But there is something that I mean,
in further down the timeline from the sort of cosmology
that you focus on, sort of cosmology I used to do
before I got into the planets was, yeah, there's this.
There's a certain volume of the present day universe
that you tend to say, well, that's kind of a fair sample.
And I've forgotten the typical side.
Maybe it's 20 million light years across or something.
It'll contain enough galaxies that you
have a cross-section of everything.
And that's like your Petri dish, right?
I'm saying, OK, I've got that experiment.
And I've got another experiment over there
that is essentially, there can be other than radiation
passing between these two places.
There's no other causal relationships.
It's like having multiple experiments.
But it's for things like galaxies.
I think when you're talking about taking,
yes, the properties of the early universe,
I mean, you only have that one experiment, right?
It's infinitely large.
But you don't see all of it.
Well, we only see to the edge from which light
is at time to reach it.
Yeah, we see what is it?
10 billion, 100 billion galaxies.
How many do we see?
No, about 300 billion.
No, people say sorry.
It's sort of fascinating to me that they're all sort of looking
like the uniformity is sort of weird.
But the uniformity on that large scale
reflects the uniformity of the early universe.
So it's because we had this very uniform universe
in the early days that the universe looks so uniform
on the large scale today.
But then, of course, from the perspective
of the topic of this conversation,
once you look at a smaller scale, so smaller than 100 megapar
sex or whatever it is that we're looking at,
that we get these much more interesting, complex
sorts of structures.
I'll go back to another experiment that happens also.
There is the actual planets, for example.
There you have different clouds forming stars,
and then you have planets.
And then, I mean, now we start looking at distribution.
So each of those is a different experiment.
And they are now, I don't know how many, they are like,
5,000 or something like that?
A little over 4,000.
So then you have 4,000 experiments
of similar things creating planets.
And then you have distribution.
I mean, you can do statistics.
I mean, distribution of planets, what
is the largest, the distances, and the alticities,
and all these things.
I mean, you can do a lot of things there.
So I think in this aspect, I mean,
it's becoming a very different experiment.
I mean, you cannot produce them, but you cannot observe them.
No, absolutely.
I mean, it's funny when I started out
as an astronomer, some people said,
we are such an impoverished science.
You can only look at stuff.
You can never do the experiments.
But it's extraordinary what you can do by just looking
and observing.
And the universe, OK, maybe the one universe,
that's one experiment, but then the subdivisions
of the universe are multiple experiments
on the different phenomena that emerge in our universe.
And it's extraordinary what happens.
Actually, this may piss you off because it's sort of one
of these top-down type things.
But something we've learned to do with galaxies, for example,
that I think nobody predicted and really
comes from quite fundamental physics is the fact
that the form and nature of galaxies.
So galaxies are a great agglomeration of stars.
The Milky Way has maybe 200 billion stars in it also.
And there are all these other billions of galaxies,
and they're all sort of morphologically different.
And there are different histories.
And when and where exactly the stars were made in those galaxies.
Some of that we now understand is
driven by the behavior of supermassive black holes
that form perhaps contemporaneously
with these galaxies way back 13 billion years ago.
And they're huge things.
Some of them are a billion times a million.
And as matter falls into them, it generates energy
that pours back out across the galaxy
and influences subsequent generations of stars.
And so it profoundly impacts the characteristics of the stars,
the planets, everything.
But who would have thought?
This is coming from black holes.
And it's the particular properties of black holes
that give rise to that kind of interesting feedback.
I mean, I find that kind of extraordinary.
Because presumably you could have universes where
you can't make black holes.
Is that possible?
I guess anything is possible.
I think anything is possible depending on your physical law.
If we have a law of gravitation the way
that we have in this universe, then we could get black holes.
But to go off your comment about black holes,
even more fundamentally than that, the fact
that actually the evolution of the universe
seems to be affected so profoundly
by the presence of dark matter and dark energy, which
are these really mysterious substances
that we've only learned about in the last, I mean,
less than 100 years, even for dark matter.
And yeah, so it seems like such a,
and we know, of course, that dark matter gravitationally
influences the formation histories of galaxies
and dark energy really on the larger scale
of the universe affecting whether or not a galaxy cluster
can actually come together without being sort of pushed
apart by the expansion of space.
So there's so many factors, so much physics going into
this seemingly simple process of galaxy formation even.
Of course, the stuff we're made of is just 4% of everything.
Start matter, dark energy, the total mass energy content
of the universe, most of it isn't like us.
That's right.
With this tiny little sprinkling of normal matter
and the periodic matter that's doing all this interesting stuff.
But it's interesting.
I mean, I don't know if you'd agree with this,
but perhaps we're too ignorant of what dark matter really is
and what it's actually, we can't see it directly.
We can only see it through its gravitational influence.
But the interesting thing is it's
that tiny sprinkling, that 4%, that
seems to have all this complexity.
And I guess that's just the nature of it.
That's just how it is.
Well, it's possible, of course, that it's quite interesting
these days because we know that dark matter is out there
based on its gravitational influence on the visible matter.
And we've never been able to detect it in either a space,
space, or earth-based observatory.
So when we create theories of what dark matter could be,
we inevitably begin with the simplest possible situation.
So my PhD thesis, for example, I postulated
a Maverick dark matter where there was only one,
all of the dark matter.
So 95% of the matter in the universe,
or that's not right, 80% of the matter and 20%
of the matter and energy content was composed
of one single particle.
But of course, that's just a hypothesis.
Given the complexity of the.
You have one type of particle.
One type of particle, yeah, not one particle.
That would be quite strange.
I think it would be a thesis.
It would be quite strange.
And given the complexity of the visible segment
of our universe, I think it would,
it's naive to assume that the dark section of the universe
is simpler than that.
So yes, we just don't know.
It could be composed of a very complex spectrum of particles
and interactions that we just can't probe.
So that's a whole other level of complexity
that may never be accessible to us.
And we hope, of course, that it is in our present day
experiments, especially at the LHC.
I introduce consciousness as one place where science and philosophy
sort of butt up against the chamber.
Yes, well, and but now sort of your bailiwick
is seems like contemporary cosmology is another.
So you mentioned the way the universe seems to be,
the fact that we can do computer simulations of assuming
slight variations in the initial conditions
or slight variations in the properties of fundamental
particles, and then see how would things play out
at a kind of macroscopic level.
And apparently physicists say that an vanishingly small
percentage of these possible variations
is anything suitable for the development of life,
so-called fine-tuning.
So our universe seems exquisitely fine-tuned
for the eventual emergence of life.
What sort of you as a theorist, as a physical theorist,
to what extent do you feel driven to look for explanations?
So we get theoretical cosmologists speculating
about multiverse.
Maybe our universe just has what it has what it takes
for there to be life.
The reason that we see such a thing,
this is such an extraordinary thing,
is that there have been untold billions of such universes
emerging or being given rise to by some premordial condition,
most of which, almost all of which, have no life.
And of course, we happen to notice it
because we can only notice the universe that
is capable of sustaining life.
So to kind of try to explain away the surprising and seemingly
rigged character of the universe by postulating our universe
as one of just a huge number of universes.
Are you inclined towards that sort of thinking?
And what's the state of play these days among physicists?
From a historical point of view, you
kind of want to take a Copernican principle to the extreme
or something that first we discovered
that the Earth was not the center of the solar system.
And then the solar system was not the only system.
And then our galaxy was not very special.
And our galaxy cluster is not very special.
If we take that to the extreme, then certainly
it would seem like a reasonable proposition
that our universe is not the only universe.
From an experimental point of view,
it's complicated because if there are other universes,
and again, coming back to the precise definition
of a universe, if a universe is everything
that we can possibly probe, then another universe,
by definition, cannot be studied.
So from a scientific point of view that becomes complicated,
that hasn't prevented everybody from not.
Investigateing it, I think it's a very reasonable thing
to study is are there theoretical physics models that
would give rise to multiple universes?
And people are doing it.
And it's particularly interesting, of course,
in the realm of string theory.
Me personally, it just seems so, it's a little bit like even
string theory within our universe,
that if it's, and maybe you can speak to this,
having been in that realm, if it's
inaccessible experimentally, even within our universe,
then for sure people should continue to study it.
But is it science?
If it's not a falsifiable theory, so maybe
it will become such a thing.
But it's not there yet.
And with a multiverse, it gets even more complicated,
because we go outside of this universe.
So I don't know.
Somebody who's been in string theory, maybe Roel can.
Yeah.
So when I was in the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton,
I was working.
And there is a very strong group in string theory.
And then there was also the debate,
when there was all these landscapes, ideas, and all
these things.
And I have friends in the two fields.
So I have my personal opinion that I'm
not going to reveal.
But I think it's a very interesting debate.
So I think that debates would be there.
Can I reveal my personal opinion?
Since you're being coy.
I think this multiverse explanation is extremely dangerous.
I think it's a cop out.
So there have been things in the past that were mysterious.
Like at one point, all the electrons in the universe
have the same mass and the same charge.
My god, what an amazing coincidence.
Who rigged that?
Maybe there's a billion universes.
We just happen to be in the one where they all
happen to come out the same.
Well, if you think that, that stops you
from discovering what we now think
is the real explanation, which is that there
is one electron field everywhere.
And these different particles are just
sort of excitations of that one field.
So a coincidence like that is a call
to do good science to explain it.
And things like, oh, well, maybe it just randomly came out
because I postulated a billion, sorry, 10 to the 500,
unobservable things.
And we happen to be in the one which is the way that we see.
It just seems to me, you might as well say, I think Zeus did it.
Yeah.
No, he's just.
Yeah.
I mean, this is exactly where the debate was at this time.
And one of my closest friends, this person
that is working in these things.
But I think the difference is that, I mean,
it's not a crazy speculation.
I think there's an underlying theory,
like a string theory, more than a theory.
It's a framework of thinking.
And then there you can do calculations.
You can do distributions.
You can do things that are more quantitative.
If you could get evidence for this,
and you weren't just postulating all those multiple copies,
simply in order to get out of our copy, that's a problem.
But if in our universe you can find,
you were saying it's very difficult to observe, right?
If, nonetheless, you can find some sort of evidence
that all these other things exist,
independent of needing them to explain this.
That's fine, of course.
And maybe I can just add one.
This is a slightly more mundane point.
But you talk about the apparent fine-tuning
of the universe for life.
And I think often that gets a little blurry,
because the truth is the details of it
are that you could actually tweak the fundamental properties
of the cosmos.
Fair amount, and in principle, still
have the sequence of events that led to life here on Earth.
So for example, you can tweak properties a little bit
and still get stars that produce carbon in some quantity.
So it's just something about this notion.
Oh, it's perfectly tuned for life.
It's not actually true.
I mean, it is tuned in such a, oh,
there is a coincidence of fundamental properties
such that in at least one place it was possible for life
to emerge, that is different than saying
universe is somehow perfectly, perfectly tuned.
You can go and you can play with cross-section of interaction
for nuclear processes in stars.
Fair amount, and still make carbon and still have stars
that basically look like the stars that we see in our universe.
So in a sense, for me, the more interesting question
and this I'm totally biased is what
is it that determines the total amount of life
in the universe, not just the fact
that there is one instance of life.
There must be something, at least within our observable universe,
which is a finite thing, that determines how often and how
much life, how many living organisms or things
are there in the entire observable universe.
That's a fixed number, any given cosmic time.
That, to me, is the boy.
Anyway, sorry, that's going off on a slight tangent.
I mean, just as I understand it, we're
talking about different sorts of independent factors that
are relatively fundamental, at least in the current physical
framework.
And some of them have more play, right?
You could still get life with some.
And then others are exquisitely fine tuned.
So there's variation.
And the estimates vary.
There's a little bit of controversy
about how independent some of these are of others.
So two to three dozen, perhaps as many of independent fine
tuned factors.
And some of them, I'm told, are exquisitely fine tuned.
You really can't play with it very much at all.
A number of like the engines.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's one.
Right.
Is there the cosmological concept?
Are you having a company too?
Yeah, it does watch.
And the concept is another fine tuning problem.
But the whole fine tuning thing is absurd.
Who is to say, the knobs, we think
that the labeling we have on the knobs
when we write the physics textbook is somehow
the label that God uses to decide, well, what mass
electron I get given, what cosmological.
The whole point of science is to understand things
and explain things.
And so firstly, if you think there's a miracle,
you should be coming up with a real explanation for it.
And secondly, maybe the laws of physics
just are what they are.
And that's a great achievement, right?
To be able to explain all sorts of things
from snowflakes to whatever on the basis
of a fairly simple set of laws with 19 arbitrary constants.
Well, I think good.
Well, it may not be a question.
If that turns out to be the state of the fundamental theory,
right, we can't simplify.
Actually, that gets to an interesting question
that we ought to talk about.
Maybe there is no fundamental theory.
Maybe it's always emerging from something,
your elephants all the way down, right?
Turtle.
Turtle.
Turtle.
Different religion.
So that's all the way down.
It's about passing all the way down.
So call it.
If the properties of my body, the causal capacities
I have biologically are derived, in some sense,
from the interaction of my cells and their arrangement
and so forth, they're not fundamental physical force
properties that I have.
But if it's derived, can you can causality
be forever passed on and nothing ever has it intrinsically?
Has any kind of inherent capacity to do things?
Can you forever borrow?
It sounds like it's analogous to borrowing money.
Somebody's got to have money originally,
because it can't be infinitely borrowed.
Yeah.
One of the things that is, I think,
what is different in physics is that.
So now I don't have the microphone.
So one of the things, I think, in fundamental physics
that is different is that what the 20th century has been
is basically unifying, finding frameworks.
I mean, you have a way of computing things.
I mean, you have field theories.
You have ways of understanding of how to do calculations.
You have a few fundamental blocks.
And the fundamental blocks, they have been reduced
to something that is a very small number.
I mean, it's good.
And the number of constants, I mean,
I can say they are 20 something or something.
It's kind of not very large.
But it has been this trend.
And I think this dream of many physicists, especially,
I mean, from the 50s to the 70s, and these things,
it was this idea that you can, every,
this tendency would be to finding a unifying theory,
that it would be the only one that can explain everything.
I mean, it can be that.
I mean, there is another fundamental theory
that instead of in four forces, I mean, you have like 25.
And then you go back to something that is more complex.
So, but this has been this tendency.
And I think this has been the dream of finding something
that is unifying.
And it was an expectation.
And I don't know, I mean, how is it going?
And an interesting thing that happens there in our quest
for, shall we say, one of these interesting properties
of the universe is that physics manifests very differently
at different energy scales.
So as we've been seeking unifying laws,
physics has also changed.
So we started in this classical universe
and entered the realm of special relativity
and quantum field theory.
And then we look at what happens with the four
fundamental interactions as we increase in energy.
And they begin to unify.
And they become different, more unified interactions.
But it's so interesting that the physics changes fundamentally
with energy scale.
So that, I think, also is related to this notion
of complexity and emergence.
But actually something, I don't know
if I can use the word unexpected,
but something new happens at certain energies.
Actually, different physics emerges.
Yeah, so I wanted to go back to the notion of randomness,
because I think we can be a little bit more
quantitative in these things.
I think, for example, in the experiment
that was describing of the cancers of the bacteria
in getting antibiotic resistance or something,
I mean, you prepare identically the same thing.
And at the end, you cannot predict
which of these 20 experiments that you, identically prepare,
is going to be the one that is going
to give antibiotic resistance in this particular thing
or the person who is going to get the cancer or the cell
that is going to get the cancer.
But you can get things about distributions.
And then on understanding what are the basic mechanisms
that happen there, that's very useful.
I mean, you can get what are the mutational factors
that contribute to that.
What are the mutations happened?
What are the genes?
How are these mutations in these genes
confer resistance to the antibiotic?
So you learn many things about what
is the underlying thing that happens.
And they are distributions, and you learn things
about distributions.
That is very useful because you learn many, many different things.
In the planets, for example, in the exoplanets,
now that we are observing many, is basically
similar thing of the galaxies.
I mean, you start with similar conditions,
and then you can try to see starting
from the similar condition.
You have the same experiment.
Even if you cannot predict exactly what
is the exact position of the planets,
if you can get to kind of a distribution of laws,
the probability of finding something
with the mass of the Jupiter in one
astronomical unit is this one, something
about probabilities and how these things happened.
So that's it.
This is a very powerful tool.
I mean, even if we don't know exactly the deterministic answer
to something, I think to predict distributions
is very, very useful.
And even if this is an emerging, I mean,
if the distribution per se is an emerging phenomenon,
that you cannot compute exactly from the initial conditions,
I think this is very useful, and it's used a lot.
OK, before we go to questions, I should tell you
that we are having a round table on consciousness in March.
Questions?
Great presentation on astrophysical astrobiology.
I'd like to get back to emergence,
and I was hoping that each of the panels could describe
in a thumbnail their definition of emergent consciousness.
And then if you could really reassure me
how machine emergent consciousness will not
be man's most dangerous invention.
Oh, really?
That's for an example, for example.
Yeah, so I do, as my remarks perhaps suggested,
I do tend to think of animal consciousness,
subjective consciousness that we have,
that presumably other mammals have,
and who knows how far down the life scale it goes,
that it's a strongly emergent kind of phenomenon.
It involves giving rise to fundamentally new features
of the whole organism, that are structural features,
but that are sustained, certainly,
by the physical properties of the organism.
So that's how I think about emergent consciousness,
and it gives rise to very difficult questions
about how one could ever theorize about it scientifically.
I appreciate it.
But I guess to quote the early 20th century emergentist,
Samuel Alexander, Scottish emergentist, scientist,
we have to approach these things with the piety
of the natural investigator.
That's how mysteriously we find ourselves
as conscious beings in a world that's
driven fundamentally by physical forces,
and then it's our job if we want to theorize about it
to figure out how that could be, but it's true.
Now, the business of scientists who
replicate forms of life that perhaps could be conscious,
could be purpose of forms that might
be less prone to irrational and behavioral than ourselves
and get organized and take over or something like that.
I can't provide any reassurances on that score.
I just don't know what the possibilities are.
I think we just don't know what the possibilities are.
Thank you.
So you have to ask her.
Anyone else who might want to jump?
I don't know if anyone else wants to.
That was a good answer.
I want to say one thing, but I'll go after you.
So yeah, I don't have anything intelligent to say.
That's fine.
So I think if some man-made creature behaved
in a sufficiently sophisticated way,
we would have to say it was conscious.
If it really, if it cried when it's offspring
were lost in the mall or whatever,
I'd, I think, be very difficult to deny that it was feeling
things and I think that would be impossible to avoid.
As to whether that would translate into danger to us,
that we simply can't tell.
Cura's actually your answer.
Does that mean that you think that this sort of strongly
emergent new thing wouldn't exist built the thing?
Instead of it evolving naturally or being just descended
from us, if we built a very complex robot,
an artificial intelligence, and it behaved
in a sufficiently like or even doglike way,
do you think that would mean that the stuff that the emergent
mental stuff was actually emerging in it?
I think we'd have that we can't say for sure
a priori, right?
All we know about is that there's consciousness associated
with a certain kind of biological form of life
rooted in neurophysiology just because we have direct
acquaintance with that phenomena and we know it's
intimately associated with our neurophysiology.
Whether something that was sort of functionally equivalent
to neurophysiology, but say silicon-based,
something artificial, whether that would give rise
to subjective experience or simply something that would
mimic, but not actually involve conscious experience,
but would mimic the kind of behavior that conscious
being such as ourselves engaged in, like crying and so forth.
That's a deep question and it's hard to say.
We couldn't answer it.
We couldn't necessarily verify what would be our best theory
based on the behavior.
But yeah, it's a difficult question.
Yeah, I don't know.
I'm just wondering if there is something
like a Turing test or something like that for consciousness.
Well, basically, I'm saying I believe the Turing test
and he's saying he doesn't completely buy it.
Yeah, so can we postulate that there is,
imagine that there is no consciousness.
And if there is an animal, they were
saying before something that there is no consciousness
and it's behaving exactly in the same way.
And then the other thing that I think
I found very problematic about consciousness
is that when you think evolution in an evolution,
when you think the relationship between different
organisms in an evolutionary way,
I mean, it's very hard to make a cut.
When evolution happens, so when consciousness happens or not,
it's a very problematic concept.
Yeah, any notion of strong emergence
implies a certain degree of discontinuity
and natural evolution of process.
But I think that's just not very well defined.
I don't think it's particularly useful.
And it's problematic.
I mean, this is the problem with consciousness, I think.
But concerning the origins of life here, maybe elsewhere,
why can't we answer that question by just creating
it in the laboratory from fundamental elements?
It seems like the initial condition
shouldn't be that hard.
You know what they were when the Earth started.
And it seems like we were a lot cheaper than going
to some very places trying to find it.
Is it just that we don't have the biggest idea how it was done?
Well, yeah.
So I have to say that you've got to search the universe
because that's my career that's a place for life.
But no, you have a point.
And so there are people whose approach to this question
is to try and build life in the lab
or have life merge out of whatever they're doing in the lab.
So the people looking at the sort of more complex level,
there are people building cells from scratch, building DNA
from scratch and trying to make that function.
And then at a lower level, there are people looking at,
as you intimate, if you take the mix of chemistry
that we think perhaps existed on the early Earth
4 billion years ago and you put it in the right conditions,
what happens?
And I think part of the problem is we don't actually
know precisely what was going on 4 billion years ago.
We don't know what the start of mix
was on the surface of the early Earth.
It perhaps was more complex than we previously thought
because we're now realizing that during the process
of star and planet formation, there's
this great swirling disk of material
that's there for a few tens of millions of years.
And there's an enormous amount of complex chemistry
that happens in that.
It only really happens then.
It doesn't happen in the sort of tenuous nebula
between the stars.
And it doesn't probably happen in the same way
once you've got a planetary surface.
So it's, yeah, I'm biased.
This is my sort of take on this.
There may be something special, special is a bad word.
There may be something that goes on in a forming planetary
system that puts a far more rich and complex chemical mixture
down now.
So what people are seeing with these experiments
where they have, for example amino acids and certain catalysts
and ultraviolet light in a simulated marine environment,
stuff does start to happen.
Problem is making the conditions right so it keeps going.
And we don't know how long it took.
So simulating this in a lab.
Maybe you need to run the simulation
in the lab for a million years.
And don't know.
Maybe you need to have many cubic miles of material.
Right.
In one little corner which the right thing happens,
one's in a billion years.
So I think it's a great question.
I think people are definitely doing that.
My bias take is we need to do the other thing too,
which is to look for finished examples.
Yeah, I think the difference in just in volume
and the difference in time is so many orders
from magnitude away from the lab and the things that,
I mean, you cannot extrapolate.
It's difficult.
I mean, there may be ways to sort of accelerate opportunity.
Yeah, but these many orders of magnitude.
Sure.
Yeah, absolutely.
I was glad to hear you were channeling Yogi Vara.
And you've said it was remarkable how much you could do
just by looking at his quote was, I think it's amazing how
much you can observe just by watching.
So very similar.
He was a wise man.
The first planetary scientist, I'm curious.
Something struck me when I was a child,
and it wasn't my parents, in the Museum of Natural History,
and that was the giant T-Rex skeleton.
And I looked at it and I said, it has a pelvis.
It has a spine.
It has a skull.
It's got arms, legs.
Owns look sort of similar.
The muscles.
Is that the galaxies coming together?
Is there a common ancestor that I'm unaware of?
Or is it just the environmental pressures coming up
with some kind of a similar result, even though dinosaurs
and mammals are quite different?
So that's still my question.
Yeah.
My eight-year-old question.
A common origin.
I'm sorry?
We have the common ancestor that has all the features.
Thank you.
Very briefly, just to answer Dr. Alfred's question
why do most of the galaxies look similar?
It's because the laws of physics are the same in all
of our known universe.
In a multiverse, as alluded to by string theory,
for example, the physical constants
might be different than you would have different formations
or not at all.
Anyway, getting back to the emergence of consciousness.
Seems to me that consciousness is just
a response to our environment.
Nothing special except that it's on a very complex level.
No different from an amoeba responding to its environment.
It seems that the entire conversation
was very egocentric and also geocentric, earth
centric.
I think everybody in this room is conscious.
And I think most of us would agree
that most mammals are conscious, although that was not accepted
until the 20th century, still not accepted
by some religious fanatics.
But would you say a worm is conscious?
Would you say a plant is conscious?
Plants have been known to respond differently
to different types of music, for example.
And as Dr. Scharf stated, there are complex organic molecules
in interstellar space.
In fact, most of the essential amino acids
have been found in meteorites that have landed on earth.
So life and consciousness unique to planet earth
is not necessarily the truth.
But my question is, what is your threshold for consciousness?
Humans are obviously conscious by our definition of mammals.
As a worm, as a flower, is a molecule that can self-replicate.
Is that conscious or not conscious?
What is a threshold?
Good.
So distinguish two things that have come together
in certain complex ways.
One is goal-directed behavioral response
to some kind of stimuli of your sense organs.
Worms engage in that.
Plants engage in that.
There's a responsiveness, behavioral responsiveness.
But the idea of consciousness is something
that mediates stimuli and certain kinds of behavioral response.
So you asked me a question.
I'm consciously aware of that.
I'm thinking about it.
I'm having conscious thoughts.
And then that has now led to my verbal behavior.
That's the observable thing.
It's my speech.
So you say, well, what's the definition?
When do we have consciousness?
Well, we have consciousness when there's something
it's like to be that kind of organism.
It has a point of view.
Non-living things, we assume, like tables,
have no point of view.
They just are.
They have intrinsic properties that
can be described in third personal terms.
Plants we typically suppose, maybe biology
will surprise us one day, but we typically suppose there's
nothing it's like to be a plant, although it does engage
in an organismic response to stimuli.
There's no subjective experience associated
because it doesn't have the right
or best understanding of where do conscious states,
where are their origins?
Well, it's for us.
Its origins is in a functioning neurophysiological system
of a certain kind.
And then things get a bit obscure.
How does functioning neuronal interactions
and large-scale neural assemblies
give rise to subjective experience?
That's the difficult question.
Yeah.
Please.
On an atomic scale, particles governed
by quantum physics, which is really everything,
do not respond in a deterministic way.
So can't we say that an electron has an opinion?
You say consciousness is an opinion.
An electron could, if you shoot an electron out
of a cathode ray tube, it could land over there,
over there, over there.
We could say that's an opinion.
Why is that not conscious?
There's no no no no.
What makes our consciousness so special
and what is the threshold level?
I think one can do the weight gain
might serve in the next step, question.
The subject is conscious.
I want to say one thing about it.
It's like wealthy.
Wealthy is 10K a year more than me.
And conscious is a little bit simpler behavior than mine,
but not too much simpler.
This is an ego section.
Well, who sets the definitions of the words?
Not the words.
LAUGHTER
Thank you.
Kind of related.
I hope it comes out coherently.
So the beginning of consciousness, self-consciousness,
and the beginning of life from non-life,
even the emergence of a complex universe,
seems to require the input of some kind of information.
So when an infant becomes self-aware,
he's talking to his parents, parents are speaking to,
it seems to correlate when infants become self-aware.
There's information exchange happening
from inanimate to animate.
You have a genetic code.
That's a genetic language.
Something about language systems seems to inherently arbitrary.
The rules of grammar of the English language
don't derive from physical laws.
So can you guys bounce that around?
What does that imply about the emergence of life
and self-consciousness?
I mean, maybe I was going to say this before to the previous question,
but it was perhaps more appropriate here.
I mean, what's interesting when I hear people talking
about consciousness, and is there a threshold beyond which
this is conscious in the way that we've seen, and so on?
I wonder if you could just forget about all that for a moment
and ask, well, OK, so why is there consciousness?
Now, obviously, the easy thing to say is, well,
it's because there's some sort of evolutionary advantage.
It's to do with, yes, our response to stimuli.
It's to do with our ability to make abstractions
and it's due to the ability of other things to do that.
So perhaps somewhere in here, there
has to be talk about the origins of consciousness.
What point in evolutionary history
and why was it suddenly advantageous,
or was it just a chance thing that some organism mutated
in the right way, there was some point mutation
in the piece of DNA, and you had enough complexity
and neuronal growth or whatever to give rise this?
Because I haven't heard that piece of this at all.
Yeah, the other thing, how independent,
going back to the question, I thought
it was very, very interesting, is
that how dependent is on language,
the definition of consciousness?
I mean, you are saying that we are kind of aware,
and then we are talking the whole time with ourselves,
and we are internalizing kind of a speech for ourselves.
So if there is a person that cannot talk
and has been isolated from the world of communication,
is there a way of saying that this person without access
to any language, this person is conscious?
And I would certainly think so, right?
Language may be, it's a difficult theoretical question
that cognitive scientists theorize about,
but the dependency of abstract reflective thought
on language and how the two are bound up.
That's one question, but consciousness itself, right?
There are animals that we have reason to believe
do not have a language capacity,
but presumably because they're basic neurophysiology,
sufficiently similar to us, and their behaviors,
indicates they are engaged, they do have conscious space.
With this communication, there is conscious space.
In non-linguistic ways, right?
That's why we think dogs are conscious.
Because it doesn't have to be language.
Yes, but now the question of the original question
that was being asked about the relationship
of information to consciousness,
this is something that some cognitive scientists do think,
right, they puzzle, what is the function of consciousness?
Why do you need this intermediary, subjective,
mental aspect?
What would that be doing biologically,
presumably it has to have some kind of advantage?
Surely it's not just a mere chance mutation,
it's such a remarkable thing.
And so some scientists do theorize
it has something to do with information
that is had by different modules
in our neurophysiological system,
in some sense, coming together, right?
So right now I can have visual information,
auditory information, I can be thinking about the topic
we're talking about, all this information
is coming together for me, somehow,
in one overarching, complex conscious state.
And there's usefulness of a kind of a free sharing
of information that perhaps this is just the beginning
of a spectrum, that consciousness seems to be a place
where a lot of information that we derive both
from our senses and internal thought processes
comes together.
And so perhaps it is actually very relevant,
but we don't know.
A lot of my questions were already asked,
so I'm making one up as I go along a couple.
But first, a couple of cool observations.
I think some of the trouble of discussing this
is that we have a predilection to name our experiences
and our observations and then treat that idea as an idea,
as a real thing and then proceed to give it properties.
So to me, that's one of the real difficulties
in consciousness.
That's not really part of my question.
But I'll just point out that the reason the conversation
goes nowhere until there is a physical substrate
that we can point to and work with,
it's in a self-enclosed area of neural philosophy.
So that's as far as it goes.
However, the question related that,
and then I have another similar couple
of observation and question.
The neocortex generates a weak electromagnetic field
that's been implicated in relatively recent research
as being the mechanism for synchronization
between distal brain areas
because the axonal propagation speed of 100 meters
and second doesn't account for it.
So I'm hoping to hear any response at all
based on someone I'm with my lead in.
Or perhaps you might think about that,
about the experience of consciousness
is possibly the experience of the electromagnetic fields
field and interaction with the neocortex,
something like that.
So that's number one.
Number two has to do with dark matter,
which is also guilty of being an idea,
not an idea just yet,
although we observe the physical phenomena.
So the question I have there is that,
my understanding of the standard model
and some of the more troubling new introduction,
supersymmetry, some other areas,
indicate that if dark, a dark,
mathematical, perhaps other than a weakly,
a strongly interactive, massive particle,
if it's something different,
then the standard model has to,
it can't accommodate that.
So that was a question for you.
Okay, thank you.
So two questions.
One is for you, one is for you.
Oh, I'll just say a little bit that I do know
about your first question about synchronicity
in the brain, maybe connecting.
Well, I know how much synchronicity is,
I think what you're talking about, I'm sorry.
I think I was intending the word in the sense you have in mind.
So this was an idea that was put forward by Christoph Koch,
a computational biologist at Caltech together with Francis Crick
of Crick and Watson fame that maybe this is the biological,
the physical substrate to consciousness and chanting it now.
I'll pass it over to my colleague who actually knows this stuff,
perhaps, that this idea has sort of died away,
that Francis Crick himself has now latched onto a new different sort of iPod.
But there wasn't. There was another paper that was in the last couple of years ago.
Okay, I'm not a biologist, so I can't speak with any authoritaviveness.
You understand?
So I think to say about that, because I don't know the topic very well.
So also, I mean, I'm very skeptical about many consciousness things.
Going back to the dark matter, and this is something that I think they are very different things.
The dark matter has been observed. I mean, it has not been observed with photons,
but it has been observed with their gravitational...
And they are kind of very nice experiments, I mean experiments by nature that happens to be there,
and you can explain very good things that are there.
So I think it's there, it's observed, and the only thing is that it's not interacting with light.
And consciousness, by... I mean, has not been observed.
So on the dark matter, and let me just see if I understand your question.
So it sounds like what you're asking is the...
How our models of dark matter fit into the standard model?
Is that the essence of the question?
Essentially, when I was at the LHC conference, there was some pretty robust discussion about
the understanding that depending on what, if and what the dark matter particle turns out to be,
if it does, that it would not fit into very nicely the standard model as we have it now.
Completely correct, and in fact, it does not fit into the standard model at all.
So what does that mean, that aside from the physics?
Well, there are a number of issues with the standard model.
We know that it's not a fundamental theory of the universe, and there are a number of problems with it.
The first one being that it does not contain a quantum theory of gravity.
That's the first issue.
It does not account for neutrino masses, which seems like this is a standard model problem, right?
We have neutrinos in the standard model, and in the standard model, they're massless.
Third, there's no viable dark matter candidate within the standard model.
And then fourth, there are a number of mathematical issues that are a little bit subtle with a standard model.
So the fact that there must be, it may be a strong word, but all of these experimental pieces,
plus the theoretical piece on the mathematics, certainly suggest that there is a more fundamental theory.
And I would say that when we talk about supersymmetry, for example, supersymmetry is sort of one more fundamental,
like one fundamental step down from the standard model in the sense that we now invoke a new symmetry between fermions and bosons.
So it's a more fundamental theory.
However, even supersymmetry in its simplest form does not necessarily involve gravitation.
Now, there are superstring theories, right?
String theories that involve supersymmetry.
So even supersymmetry is an effective theory of some more fundamental theory.
That's what's driving theoretical physicists right now, is the sense that we will have some unified theory in the bottom.
So we're just one really quick follow-up.
Have you listened to?
I'll talk to you.
Sure, we can talk about biceps too.
The first indication is that it may not be dust.
Is that true?
I thought it was dust.
And event that reductionist scientists claim as a great victory for their team is that many phenomena that were catalogued and
described by classical thermodynamicists were subsequently explained at a microscopic fundamental level by statistical mechanitians.
So this is a very inviting target for champions of strong emergence.
And a particular crack at it that I've heard recently goes like this.
I think this is from a physicist named Sean Carroll.
He was a very important phenomenon occurring in physical systems everywhere at all different levels, all different energies,
involving many different substances.
And he says that when you examine these closely, it appears as if the way they happen is the same, no matter what the system is made of.
In other words, it really doesn't depend on what the nature of the particle is.
So then how can you say that the microscopic particulars of what the constituents of the system are?
Is there any way determining what's happening at the higher level?
I have my own reasons for not being impressed by that argument, but I want to know what the members of the panel think.
Thank you.
It would be an example of weak emergence. It would be successfully explaining large-scale behavior in terms of little...
It's true that sometimes changing the little stuff doesn't make much difference to the big stuff.
And galaxies may be an example of that. Any old fluctuation will give you the same thing.
So can you...
I think you're a very critical experience.
Critical exponents and all these things.
Critical exponents where they are phase transitions, trying to see... you can classify the phase transitions, but some exponents of...
I think that what the argument was was that if properties of the microscopic constituents are determining what's happening,
then the way it happens should in some way depend on what those particles are.
In some way, but it may be very little.
So sometimes you'll find that much the same microscopic...
Sorry, wildly different microscopic inputs give you much the same macroscopic output, but sometimes, like mutations, it makes a huge difference.
So... is that... is that on?
I think probably... I mean, you have in mind, like in statistical mechanics, when you imagine that you change...
I mean, you can't describe, for example, the casting of this room with temperature, and pressure, and volume, and these different things.
And you don't have to know what are the details of the molecules. So if you just change hydrogen or nitrogen by whatever it is, I mean...
Then basically you can describe the same system with a few variables that are independent of what is the microscopic details of the gas that is in the room.
Is that... is that... and then there are distributions that you can do statistics on the same.
Well, I think you've essentially recapitulated what my own objection was to the... to what I thought when I first read this.
I thought...
So...
Yeah.
Next question, and then you can...
I just wanted to thank all of you who have been a tremendous discussion with wide-ranging input from different fields,
and I'm sure everybody else have greatly enjoyed it.
My question really goes back to the fundamental question of...
...mergence. I take it most of you have staked out a position as weak emergence proponents.
And I'm just trying to get my arms around what that means. I mean, a cloud, when it produces rain, I guess we don't think of rain as emergence,
but if it's a little colder and it produces snowflakes, and each one of them is unique and has this extraordinary crystal structure,
we think of it as an emergent phenomenon.
But I think it's something... I don't know enough about meteorology to know,
but I assume it's something that science can replicate in the laboratory and understand thoroughly.
Is that really... is it just something that's very neat that we... that comes out as something simple,
like bees produce... have this extraordinary society or starling...
...I produce these amazing patterns.
I'm ruling out the strong version of emergence, which seems to me just sort of got to the gaps to some extent.
Is there more to emergence that it's just really cool stuff that comes out of simple stuff that we either understand thoroughly
or at least have the possibility of understanding thoroughly?
I think that's about it.
I think that's about it for most...
I would say that's about it for a lot of the phenomena in question.
That is, just because I do think of consciousness as strongly emergent,
that doesn't give me any tendency towards thinking of any of these other...
I think that's part of the one thing that's distorted, thinking about emergence this way,
we gravitate towards one simple overarching sort of explanatory paradigm.
Is it weak emergence or strong? And I think we've got different phenomena,
and it's an empirical question in every case, and maybe we need to theorize about it differently.
There is a commonality. The reason we use the word emergence in all these cases is just the idea of new,
interesting patterns that involve forms of behavior and property instantiations that are different from the kinds of patterns
describable in lower level sciences, the different properties concepts than one invokes in lower level science.
And so in that sense, that's emergence, that's uncontroversial, but the details,
and whether or not it amounts to something much stronger than merely that,
that becomes an empirical question.
I have a question about, not just mamme in the sense of mamme outside of us,
but also our own instrumentation as in how much we understand our senses,
and how that plays into how we think of what we know.
And it seems that during the discussion there was...
Well, there was no mention of it, I'm sure it plays into the consciousness of what you study and what you measure,
because sometimes I feel like we forget that.
And in terms of... It goes... I want to link it back to the idea of consciousness.
You know, one thing about communicating our consciousness is not just language in the sense of human language.
If you put too much stuff on that table, it will break, is that communication.
Isn't that feedback? Is it feedback communication?
So how do we know that... I think we're losing the sense that we have a limited capacity to understand that
if you can talk about measuring and the idea of instruments and how that limits us.
It always feels like that we forget that we have this limitation would continue to be limited by not only our capacity to understand,
well, ultimately our capacity to understand, but also our instrumentation, the instruments that we use.
So if you can talk about that a little bit.
What's up, you're up.
Yeah, I think it's an interesting point. As you were saying, I was thinking, well, the funny thing is we live at a time where we're now
construing tools and instruments, particularly in terms of software and computers,
that greatly extend our ability to understand things, to understand particularly things like emergent phenomena
where, I mean, you talked about, you end up thinking about distributions of things rather than an individual instance of a particular
vent or whatever.
So, you know, this is just what popped into my head.
The conversation is constantly changing.
And perhaps it's always... we're constantly augmenting capacity.
We used to do it by grinding lenses and peering into test tubes or out at the stars.
And we're still doing that, but now we're also constructing software and machines that greatly extend our capacity to
build and conceptualize vast amounts of data that otherwise would appear extremely unstructured to our raw sensors.
So I... yeah, I don't know. That doesn't really answer anything. I just put that.
I think there's a deep and difficult question here. So we have our basic five senses.
I'm looking at this tabletop which has a cylindrical, shallow cylindrical shape.
I can learn about that perceptually through vision.
It has a certain look to me from a certain angle. I can get tactile information about its shape.
We... these... the tactile information and the visual information, they go together so constantly in us that we forget if we
stopped and isolated. Those are completely different forms of information that are coming in.
And we've just learned to associate them so that if I close my eyes and have that check, I can picture before my mind
something that will look like what it will look like when I open my eyes.
But in fact, these are two just very different. And as you say, they have a certain degree of precision.
They have certain limits, our senses. So then theoretical science sort of tries to abstract away from these things
and give kind of formalized pictures of reality, kind of very, you know,
mathematically dynamical theories. But then when it comes to, yeah, but do we understand what the theory is saying?
It seems like the formalism isn't enough. I mean, quantum mechanics is the great case, right?
It's this beautiful mathematical formalism, apparently. Notice you understand it well.
And it's extremely predictably accurate. I'm told the most accurate theory in the history of science, right?
And yet you say, but intuitively to understand, it's one thing to work with the theory and say, okay, apply the formalism,
do the measurements of a certain sort, and you can predict not individual outcomes, but distribution of outcomes.
And it all comes out right. But then you say, yeah, but what is it saying about the deep structure of matter?
And because we can't visualize it, we can't connect it to our senses, we feel like there's a barrier.
We can't really understand it. So for us, understanding is bounded by our ability to picture and visualize.
So it raises deep, I think, deep philosophical questions about the limits of understanding.
Yeah. And it seems like because we think from our own perspective, and we very seldomly think of things from another perspective,
maybe even another animal's perspective. Forget the table's perspective.
You know, that sometimes that limits us from understanding from a different way and seldom the egotistical aspect of ourselves
refuse to let us think from other perspectives in some ways. And that limits our understanding as well.
Thank you.
Thanks for this amazing discussion. You really have blown my mind.
And so I wanted to ask a couple, two quick questions. I make it quick.
Dr. Robodon, you really bummed me out when you shot down the whole consciousness idea.
I thought we were going to talk about all different kinds of consciousness, and you're like, no, there's no such thing.
So this question is for you. I read some really interesting stuff about how our thoughts and our moods and stuff can be influenced
by the flora in our intestines or that. That parasites and other things can influence our thoughts, or maybe even our thoughts.
So I've kind of been feeling like that consciousness or thought, if that's a better word for you, is,
a consensus of different things happening and maybe even of different living things happening.
And so I wanted you to maybe share anything that thoughts you have on that concept.
And then the question was for Dr. Khrushberg.
I noticed in your bio, and it must be in here because you didn't want it taken out.
So I figured it's fair game that you're a Buddhist.
And so I really wanted to know your perspective on your thoughts of emergence and all of this particle physics and stuff.
And how does that fit with Buddhism? And do you see any similarities or kind of those two?
Because to me, as a layman in both the language sometimes sounds the same.
When I think of emergence and when I think of the singular mind, I'm not a Buddhist.
But you know what I mean. So those are my questions. Thank you.
So regarding the democratic thought in theory of consciousness, because I don't know what consciousness is, or thought.
So no, I don't think thought is true. But I think there's some very interesting data that can be quantitatively
be precise. For example, if one of the things that I think is fascinating, if we just look in the genome of any of our cells,
so this is like two copies and they are 3 billion letters of those.
Only 1% is called in genes, so only 1% is doing proteins, most of the proteins that we know.
But this is like 10% that they're dead viruses, many of those they are alive.
So there are things that happened in our history. They came and they infected us.
They stay there, many of those they die.
And we carry this cemetery. Each of our cells, they carry a cemetery of viruses that is more than the protein coding part of our genome.
And this is fascinating. And you see there are a lot of exchange of genomic materials between different species also.
And in bacteria it happens very often. But through different mechanisms, for example, these things, we have a lot of things even in our cells.
And then, as you were saying, in all the microbiome, in all the...
This is a very active field of research. It's trying to connect many of my colleagues. They are trying to connect the microbiome and many different things,
many different health conditions. And it's a very active field of research.
And it's very challenging from many technical points of views.
But I can discuss with you in detail many of these things. It's very, very interesting.
And the other thing is, I think, just saying that we are a very homogeneous type of organism and all these things.
Even from the evolution point of view, I think it's fascinating. I mean, we know that some of our genes, ones that are important for us,
and they were coming from other organisms. So this is fascinating. I mean, that we have this migration of different information between different species that have been blocked by our traditional viewpoint.
And in animals, it's usually kind of the idea of species that they are kind of isolated reproductive units is true.
But when you go to plants, for example, you see that many of the plants that we drink and smoke every day, I mean,
they are the combination of merging of different species and all these things. This is fascinating.
Now that we are reading a lot of these genomes, we realize how these amounts of information from different places is coming together.
All this is fascinating.
So...
First you have to meditate.
Exactly.
Let me begin by saying that I'm a practitioner of Buddhism, and I'm not a thinker of Buddhism, which means that I'm a meditation practitioner,
and I practice meditation regularly.
And your question is very interesting because in my experience, my first-person experience, there are analogies between what I know about theoretical physics
and my experience in meditation and consequently in daily life.
One example, and this is something that I've thought a little bit about, is the notion of space in theoretical physics and in Buddhism.
Of course, we've talked a little bit about space, but space, from a physics point of view, is actually very complicated.
If you take out all of the stuff that's in space, that's in the universe, and you're just left with space,
that space actually has some fundamental energy to it.
You have this ability to create particle pairs just from the vacuum, and from those energy fluctuations, we get the emergence of particles.
In fact, these fluctuations give rise to structure in the universe.
And again, this is very experiential, but something similar happens, I think, with our experience, in the sense that it emerges from what we would say in Buddhism, is the Dharmakaya, the vast space of experience.
And Dharmakaya, there is a Sambo Gakaya, an energy fluctuation, and out of that emerges our experience, which is the Nirmana Kaya.
So there are some similar, I mean this is, I could really go on for a while here, but that's one thing that from my experience, kind of one analogy between physics and the experience of reality
that we kind of tap into through meditation.
So let me stop there, and we can talk more about it after, but it's...
Last question.
So I'll just ask the question first, and I don't give my reasons for asking the question, but the question is, so we've talked a lot about different things.
What is actually an example of strongly emergent phenomena in the science, and this is why I'm asking this, so you're pointing.
It's because we've talked about a kind of philosophy of mind, so the problem of consciousness, and we say it's like specifically in the nature of consciousness itself that we can't, that it's not reducible.
And then we kind of came up with one example, and with you with physics, that was that the idea of multiple universes, and we get to the definite, if we give a really specific, precise definition of the universe, then we can't say that there is more than one.
It's just logically impossible.
So then, my question would be, is strongly emergent phenomena only in those two cases or in a case where it's just definitionally impossible?
I'm up with phenomena that explains the higher level, and on the other hand, like with environmental, biological science chemistry, do we actually have examples of strongly emergent phenomena?
Even if you don't believe in them yourself, I can tell you're all rejectionist, but if you don't believe in what are the examples?
I think there might be a problem with strong emergence in principle, which is that if you see some new thing that is apparently strongly emergent, your first effort is going to be to create new entities, to subsume it into a new framework,
and then it'll just be part of the whole theory you already have.
It won't have emerged. It'll just like the magnetic field or neutrino, you'll just add it to the inventory and keep it.
And then the question is, what kind of thing could that not apply to?
And the poster child for that was conscious experience, but then my suggestion about that was that it's decoupled from everything.
It's sort of unreachable in principle, and so, yeah, it's decoupled from being able to be subsumed into that, because it's decoupled from everything.
You're going to disagree with that, so you get airtime.
But so maybe strong emergence is a difficult thing to actually really have.
Play-off Mark's comment. First, an advertisement for a different way of being a realist about conscious experience and saying that it's fundamental without being emergentist is to say it's ubiquitous.
This so-called old panpsychist idea, which is getting some new play again.
So then you say, our conscious experience is just a full-blown particular form of something that's there in matter everywhere.
You treat it as something fundamental. Maybe it's the intrinsic character of the physical more generally.
Lots of ideas. Flossers like to run play with this idea.
I'm not myself disposed in that direction, but a lot of people are.
But the other thing, the only other thing I wanted to say and really to kick it to some people with the physics background is we haven't talked about quantum entanglement, right?
And that seems like it could be naturally, this is very low-level physics, right?
Where particles need to be treated in a certain way and the rough idea is that you cannot describe, you can't decompose the coupled system in terms of the intrinsic properties and the relations among them of the individual particles that entered into this system.
There's some sense of systemic property of this entangled system that isn't, you can't think of it as in some sense just built up out of the individual properties, items in isolation.
And then some people say, going space-time, looking at you, this is all up your alley, I assume.
Some people say, well, if quantum mechanics is ubiquitous, then the whole universe becomes possibly needs to be thought of theorized as.
And then one great big quantum entangled system is an accessible, strong emergence perhaps.
But with that, I'll just pass it over to you.
I don't think that's a tangled medicine example of...
Okay, so for entangled man, you have a particle that can be up or down, another particle is up or down, and then you have a way of describing this thing, which is a vector space, another one.
And you construct a new one by taking the tensor product of the two.
So taking the units, you can construct a hidden space, you can construct a space that is the space of everything.
So taking each of the units, you can take a new definition or a new definition in a space that you can describe the whole system.
I think as an example of what I was saying, the wave function, right, we say, oh, that's the wave function and that captures all this entanglement.
And then we talk about the wave function, that's how we do physics now. So we just added a new entity to capture that thing.
But if this new entity is a global thing, it's not an atomistic thing, then in what sense have we not embedded some kind of strong notion of emergence into the fundamental theory thing?
So we have to drive by the individual. So if there are these bottles here and each of those, you have the definition of, I mean, a way of quantizing the system,
you can combine the whole system by taking the product of all these different things.
So this is a very well-formal way of doing these things.
I'm not going to debate.
It makes a sense of the connection between things and there was presence in classical physics before you had wave functions.
That's true.
Okay. Please feel your questioners and thank you very much.
Thank you.
