Have you done one of these people?
No.
How about you?
Good afternoon, everybody.
Welcome.
I'm Rob Penzer.
I'm the Associate Director of the Heelics Center.
I have an announcement for an upcoming roundtable
on Saturday, May 20th on complexity and emergence.
It's the second of our roundtables on the subject,
called Visions of Cosmic Order from Particles to People.
And our discussants will be William Grassi, who's
the founder of Metanexis, David Grinspoon, senior scientist
at the Planetary Science Institute,
Iliya Tampkin, Professor of Biology
at Northern Virginia Community College
and Research Associate at the National Museum
of Natural History, and Tyler Volk, Professor of Biology
and Environmental Studies at NYU.
So today's topic, Design and Nature,
let me introduce our participants today.
And when I announce your name, if you can raise your hand.
Elizabeth Alter.
Adrian Bejan.
Robin Collins.
Mark Norel.
And Caleb Scharf.
And without further ado, I turn this over to our participants.
You look at him.
OK.
Well, I get to talk about design and nature.
And design and nature has always been one of these things
that people have questioned since the origins of modern science,
especially in Western Europe, in terms
with the origin of the enlightening.
And design and nature can be boiled down
into two different things.
One, is there a creator?
Is there some intelligent being who
figured all this stuff out?
Or are we just the products of physical constraint?
I mean, is it the reason that knees look like hinges
is because that's the way it works?
Is the reason that we have so many
of the same kinds of eyes and everything
from giant squids to ourselves?
Is that just because of things that
are embedded within our developmental patterns in our DNA
and with evolution being an optimizing process,
that that's just what ends up under different selective
regimes.
So this has always been two different kinds of things
which people have looked at myself.
I'm more on the kind of just replicating piece of DNA.
And this is just the way that it works out as far as
the way that we deal with the world either through constraint.
When I say constraint, I see that it
through physical constraints from the external part
or through constraints just on the basis of what
that our genetic material is possible
to be able to do within certain kinds of things
along with our developmental channeling.
But some other people have some different opinions.
So let's open it up.
I would see that as not you kind of painted those two
as confouries, but you might ask about the constraints
themselves whether there's a design-like pattern
in those constraints.
And so you could have it and you have
to look at physical reality in different levels.
You've got the biological level down to the chemical level.
And the biological level seems to be, at least,
a lot of accidents seems to be one of the governing
principles.
But when you get all the way down to, let's say,
the physical level, that's where I think a real big question
comes in.
To what degree does that look random,
or is that have a design-like character?
And by design in a very general sense,
I would say that the parts, so you can invoke a crater,
but I think there's even a more general sense in which
the parts are arranged in some intricate way
so that they realize some easily recognizable
overall property.
And so in the case of, like, I work in the area,
fine-tuning of the cosmos for life,
and so there, things do seem to be extremely well-adjusted
so that life can exist.
I disagree.
I'll go ahead.
Go ahead.
You go ahead.
Come back.
Well, I get the thing.
I know this understanding of design as you stated it,
but it is a novelty because English is, in fact,
a very, very young language.
Design is a very old concept.
The Council on Latin, the word signal means sign.
It is something that's discernible,
meaning to us, the observers.
And this observation, the sign, conveys a message,
which if followed, it means that it's useful to us.
Engineering, which is my education, comes from that.
It is about, OK, making better drawings.
And so that's design.
And where the image comes from, for example,
the shape of a leaf or the bend in a river,
is the observation.
Has nothing to do with who made that?
It is all about the observer getting the idea
that that observation is useful.
So that the observer with it, with the observation,
and with the artifact that comes from doing something,
acting, based on that observation,
the observer becomes a more empowered mover of itself
or himself on the landscape.
So that's design.
And so design is one of the most universal phenomena,
the most universal phenomenon of value to us that exists.
It's right there, or down there with gravity,
and with the irreversibility, the second law of dynamics.
That is design.
I agree with that entirely, but isn't that a lot,
because of its just constraint, that there's physical constraints?
Quite the opposite.
It's about freedom, not constraints,
without freedom.
On the contrary, without freedom, there's no discernible image,
no change in that image, no evolution.
And I think it speaks to this better than anyone,
because certainly, there is constraint
within the physical world, and stuff,
of what organisms are capable of doing
and not capable of doing.
Sure.
I mean, the classic example of this
is the laryngeal nerve in the giraffe,
which this is a sort of a case study in evolutionary biology.
The laryngeal nerve in the giraffe branches off
the vagus nerve in the brain, travels all the way down
through some arteries in the heart,
and then back up the neck of the giraffe,
where it innervates the larynx.
Why would it travel all that way down and all the way back?
Well, it's just because of the constraint
from its ancestors.
So that design, if you could call it that,
evolved in our fish ancestors, and that constraint,
that physiological constraint remains in the giraffe,
even though it causes this bizarre morphology.
One of the, I think when you're speaking about freedom
that comes as part of design, and as an evolutionary genomist,
I think of that as variation, the raw variation,
that is necessary for adaptation.
And I think one of the interesting aspects
to consider when we think about nature
and whether, as the da Vinci quote that we were provided with,
suggests that nothing is extra in nature
because it's so finely designed for its environs.
If we look at the genome, say the human genome,
3 billion base pairs, 50% of that,
fully 50% of that is repetitive DNA with no known purpose.
So there's a lot of extra stuff out there in nature.
And surely it's shaped by constraint,
but it's that variation that allows freedom to adapt.
I think there's one we have, but we haven't spoken.
So I'm just biting my time.
Well, maybe just to, so I'm trying to understand
when you talk about freedom.
So I guess, you know, I come out of physics.
And so to me, all that we're talking about here
and what you've talked about, what you've talked about is,
you know, boils down to, well, the constraints,
there are constraints of, I don't want to use the word design.
Wow, that's terrible.
I don't want to use the word design.
Everything is finding its way through a complex energy landscape.
I mean, as a physicist, we always resort to this.
We always say, well, it's all about finding free energy to do work.
So our molecules are doing that all the time.
Our DNA is doing all that all the time.
It's the root of biological evolution at some level.
It is these organisms there.
They're exploring this vast chemical landscape
and where there is opportunity to extract free energy and do
work, it will happen.
And why is that?
Because the whole universe is driven
towards dissipation of energy, right?
And moving towards a higher entropy state.
And so I guess, is that the freedom that you see
is this vast energy landscape that everything
from the river to the molecule is exploring?
I will, OK, since I like that you stick the language
of thermodynamics.
I'll try to make it more readable to everybody.
The first of all, I like the title of your blog, Life Unbound It.
Here's a comment on the so-called constraint.
It does not exist, OK?
There's the space is to be accessed by these flows
that you bring up.
The flows that are driven by the power
that you bring up.
The so-called free energy, a much better name for that
is fuel or food for those of us who live on this planet,
is converted into the power by engines.
And most of the engines are natural, OK?
Animals are basically engines on the tracks.
And of course, we are now very likely
to be riding on engines made by smarter humans
20 years ago in Britain.
And in propelling as much, much more cheaply.
But the question that is not being addressed until now
is, what is that power coming from the free energy useful
for to what end?
And the end is, for greater, easier movement,
movement into this free space, NES, available time,
because obviously here I speak autobiographically,
I would like to live longer.
And so I could move more easily all over
and bring others along with me, you see?
So that's the tendency.
As Neil's board said, nature is about us.
It's about what we say about nature.
That's what's interesting.
So that's the beginning of a more inclusive picture
of the topic.
I read parts of your book.
And I had a question for you.
The constructional laws that things constructive.
Constructive.
Constructive.
If you can say fractal, OK?
Constructal.
It's constructed.
So long is that things systems move towards more easier
and easier flow.
Use your greater access.
I like to, yeah.
So I mean, just a couple of really everyday examples.
My drain gets plugged up.
It seems like it's went from less easy flow
for easy flow to less easy flow, or arteries get clogged.
So how do you deal with examples like that?
Those examples are very different.
Your drain gets plugged up because your drain,
the pipe is not natural.
It is not free to morph, to morph,
to live with the incidental blockage.
The pipe is your artifact.
The drain is you, you're the human and machine specimen.
The river basin is the natural counterpart of your example.
In the river basin, I grew up under Daniel.
And I've been observing as a kid going fishing.
The river basin gets the tree log out of the way.
Tree logs do block the flow.
It does the sunken ship.
But the river, because it is free to morph,
because it is alive, is a flow architecture,
is a sign, is a thing that impresses you,
has the natural, the intrinsic property
of evolving to flow more easily.
So what about arteries?
Arrays?
Yeah, like people.
Same thing.
The artery also does its best until it's old enough
to split, to basically cause an aneurysm, to do all sorts of things.
But it seems to have gone from when you're younger,
your arteries are, there's more free flow.
So the evolution there seems to be from more free flow to less.
And that's what...
No, no, the life of a human being is no devolution.
It's called growth.
Many people in science confuse the life of the individual
with the evolution of the species.
No, evolution is about the...
Not sure we confuse it.
That's what we think is.
Right, it's part and parcel.
A single organism is one instance out of a vast evolutionary landscape, right?
And it's playing...
So I hear...
Are you suggesting that there's agency in a river or an arteries?
I mean, that's the sort of...
I hear that in the language, but I'm not sure that's what you're suggesting.
What is your definition of agency?
I mean, literally the dictionary definition of agency.
Well, you don't know, I'm asking you.
Are you saying...
No, I've used the word.
Because here's the word.
Is the river somehow deciding?
No, no, agency doesn't mean that.
Agency is essentially power.
Power, which is that that makes action possible.
Agency is not about the direction in which the design change
happens because of the power that is used.
The direction of the change in flow architecture,
because of that power you brought up the engines earlier,
that is actually the phenomenon of the evolution,
which is of all physics, and which is summarized by the constructive law of physics,
which is really the statement of everything that is...
that is finite size, not the quirk,
where you can tell some more invisible, finite size,
including the solar cell bodies,
has the...
In order to persist, which is to...
That means to live in physics,
it must evolve freely, freely, toward greater access.
Or in your example of the universe, toward the faster route to equilibrium,
which means death.
But why in a biological or an evolutionary context then?
I mean, if you take it back to looking at how evolution works,
why are there then unoccupied ecological spaces?
Because it's that if you...
I mean, we just did it for our students, we just did something
for an exhibit that we want to do,
and you can look at like a three-axis graph of...
Of it?
A three-axis projection of a bird egg, for instance,
and you can...
Like one axis is size, one axis is shape,
and the other axis is color.
Okay.
The third is what?
Color.
Color.
Yeah.
And if you would look at it that from...
It could say, yeah, you know, that evolution is a great optimizing thing,
you would expect that the whole kind of thing would be filled in universally,
but it's not.
There's big, empty spaces in a lot of it.
Right.
Of where...
Or just unoccupied ecological spaces.
And that's just one example.
I mean, people have recognized that for a long time,
and then once in a while some major evolutionary event happens,
I mean, previous to about 325 million years ago,
there was nothing that weighed over 20...
25, 30 grams that flew.
And then all of a sudden is that flying reptiles,
charasars evolved, and then also birds evolved,
then later on.
And then all of a sudden that was unoccupied ecological space
that became filled in.
And because of whatever happened, but nevertheless,
is that it's very...
It just doesn't go with this kind of thing,
it is always just that this undercurrent of...
I can respond to you by speaking a language that most people know,
which is that of looking at the river basin morphology, the map.
The wetland, the rain keeps falling, is wide open.
By the river channels, fall hierarchical,
happen only in the sun places.
There is lots of space that's not invaded by...
I mean, you call it design space.
It were...
Okay, for that my energy landscape.
There are lots of...
Most of it is actually not bathed.
And the reason is that in order to bathe with flow,
an area or a volume, the easiest,
meaning the greatest access to the entire space
is offered by a vasculature.
A vasculature.
This is why all these things that come up are happening.
You mentioned repetitive DNA in this theoretical infinity,
infinite space of DNA combinations.
The reason is that all DNA is not equal,
just like the words in a language.
Most of us speak basically hierarchy of words.
All of them, very few.
It's much smaller than the number than the main vocabulary.
Because that is the way to speak easiest
and the way to communicate with everybody else the fastest.
So you talk about these things that look the same,
that have two eyes, well, they had no eyes
before the Cambrian explosion.
But then...
But they're still limited by like the Aristingular history.
Is it all why I've said it from a common ancestor?
So we're stuck with that.
But let me just say one more thing, which is the punchline.
So when the eye occurred, obviously two eyes were better
because the world is flat.
These beings were perceiving the ambient, which is flat.
The two eyes were oriented this way, not this way.
And that's right.
And as soon as that happened, movement became immensely easier,
easier, safer, farther, just like after the invention of radar
in military aviation.
And so that's why you talked about the nature of optimizing things.
That's why this trade stayed.
The traits that are in fact inferior to existing alternatives
do not stay.
What works is kept.
That's evolution.
And it's a random up to a point.
That's kind of weird, Bill.
I find it a lot, I mean, you know, not an example.
You know, why are the...
I mean, we had...
It was bilateral symmetry in organisms, I think,
before complex eyes evolved.
I mean, there are other reasons for that.
I'm not an expert in evolution, but...
Well, I mean, like, you know...
Yeah, in terms of the repetitive DNA,
talking about the reason that exists in the genome,
certainly not all organisms have the degree of repetitive DNA
that mammals have, but it's thought that that's the result of
viral elements, viral DNA that, you know,
that actually come and insert genomic elements
that will copy DNA over and over,
and that's what they do for a living.
So, viral infection into your genome can result in many of those events.
So, you know, I think most people consider that to be a random process.
Yeah, I mean, like birds, when it's since have tiny genomes
compared to mammals, and their ancestors' crocodiles have genomes,
which are not ancestors, but the closest living group to them
have genomes, which are far larger than birds are.
Look, there is the river basin that has no genome,
yet it looks just like the human lung, okay?
Yeah, but that's not a consequence.
That's nothing to do with it, because it's like that it doesn't have a singular history.
It's not related to every other river basin in the planet.
I think that's an example of...
So, people who study complex systems are always talking,
I'm sure you know this, that talk about scaling laws,
for example, that exist across all sorts of things.
So, there are scaling laws in biology between body mass and metabolism, right?
And it's across all organisms, and it's probably it's a result of some
approximate optimization process, but it's still playing out
over billions of years of evolution.
It's the same scaling law that exists in language.
It's called the Zip Law, right?
It's the word use frequency versus, you know,
the...
So, you know, these are all...
I think as a physicist, I would say that a lot of what you're talking about,
the rivers and so on, yes, there are similarities to biological systems,
but they're for slightly different reasons.
They're not because of inherited traits, right?
They're because of...
And this perhaps gets back to the universal idea of design,
that there are these emergent scaling laws, these emergent relationships,
because of the underlying nature of systems driven by, you know,
finding their way through some energy landscape of optimization,
of efficiency and so on, right?
I mean, the same...
I think these scaling rules also apply to a circulatory system, right?
Right.
And things like the species area curve, how many species you find in, you know,
one square meter versus 100 square meters?
Right.
Let me try to clarify the words we speak.
These scaling laws that you mentioned are not laws of physics.
They are compact mathematical summaries, also known as correlations,
of observations.
The law of physics is the purely mental viewing that empowers one to predict
such correlations.
And that is what I do.
And along the way, what I predict is not only the correlations,
and all these things you bring up, including zips,
I predict why, at one point, the so-called correlation should break down,
because, yes, there is a scaling law to the many, many ramifications
in the human life, but with a constructive law, I predict that the cutoff should be 23
branching levels.
That is the power of a law of physics.
So, yes, most of my colleagues use the word law when, in fact,
they're talking about an empirical activity, which is that of making a more
compact, a huge volume of observations.
The law of physics does that one better.
It makes even more compact a huge number of these correlations.
I'm just going to go back to something previous.
I said you disagree about the finding too.
I want to further take on it.
Well, I mean, would it be useful if you explain, do you want to explain a little
bit what point is and then I can.
OK, so what's been discussed pretty much since the 70s has been what's called
anthropic fine tuning, and that the universe is, in many ways, the fundamental
structure precisely set so that life can exist at least somewhere
in the universe.
OK, and I usually like to refer to the kind of life is what I call embodied
conscious agents, which would be a generalized version of what we are.
And so you could do this on different levels.
There's the laws of nature, the very general principles like the law of
gravity or that, unlike charges repel each other.
And there has to be the right set of those.
If you like pulled off the law of gravity, there wouldn't be any masses
when clumped together and obviously you wouldn't get highly complex beings like
us and would also be stars, which are the energy sources for them.
And then another, the post-discussed area of this is on what they call the
fundamental parameters of physics.
So those would be like the mass of the proton or even more fundamental than that
is the mass of the up and down quarks, which compose the proton.
Other examples would be the strength of gravity as not just the strength on any
given planet, but that constant g in Newton's law that f equals g, the mass,
first mass times the second mass divided by the distance between m squared,
that's all.
There's a number for that and you can express that for those who have physics
training, you can express that in what's called dimensionalist units.
You don't actually have to refer to units there.
But anyhow, it's a number that gives the strength of gravity.
There's a number that gives the strength of the electromagnetic force, the strong
nuclear force, et cetera.
And those have to be precisely adjusted over vast ranges of possibilities in order
to have a universe that allows for what I would say would be life more
generally stable, reproducible complexity.
And I can give more examples than those.
There's lots of examples you can give, but that's the general idea.
Right.
And I think, yeah, what I'll get to why I sort of made my squeak of that objective.
What's so interesting about that as part of this topic of design and nature is that
it could be construed to mean that everything was set up, as you say,
to be just so in order to enable the production of things like stars in the
cosmos, which in turn produced heavy elements in just the right abundancies
to ultimately make planets with chemical compositions that allow for the sort of
complexity that life can emerge from.
And I've been interested in that for a while.
And what's interesting to me, actually, is that now we come back and look at it
with a little more scrutiny.
And I'll explain this as well, that fine tuning is probably not so fine at all,
which negates some of this idea that the universe is perfect for life or just
appears to be perfect for that one instance of, you know, cognizant life that
you talk about.
So I have two things to say.
And one is to do with people's investigations of that quite recently that
seem to suggest the universe is not fine-tuned particularly well.
And the other piece of it is, I think you can flip it around and, you know,
it's predicated on the notion of life being a very particular thing, right,
carbon-based organisms somewhat like us.
And the truth is we don't know whether you can build life out of other
building blocks or not.
Suppose you can't.
Suppose life can be more general as a phenomenon.
It can come together out of any set of building blocks that allow for
sufficient complexity, right, and maybe that's, I mean, everybody always says
silicon, but silicon probably isn't a very good element to be involved in this,
but it could be.
You know, then that could conceivably change the perception of the universe
being particularly well-fined-tuned.
But I just wanted to say, and this is why I sort of, you know, got excited when
you mentioned it, that, you know, so the hands are very, very
important.
You know, so there has been recent work on this from the physics end.
You may well be aware of it, but for example, you mentioned the relative
strength or the strength of gravity, right, and so one of those
dimensionless quantities is the strength of gravity to the strength of
electromagnetic forces.
That ratio has been deemed in the past as something that if that was changed
just a little bit, you couldn't make things like stars, right, because a star
is essentially a competition between gravity and electromagnetic forces.
It's in a sort of dynamic equilibrium as matter comes together.
And so the argument has been, well, if you changed gravity a little bit or you
changed electromagnetic, magnetism a tiny bit, you just wouldn't make stars,
and all that then follows.
But recent investigation of that suggests that in fact, you could still make
stars, even if you change the strength of electromagnetism by maybe a factor
of a thousand, and if you change the strength of gravity, the G constant,
by up to a million, or maybe even 10 million, that space, that parameter
space still allows for stars to form in the universe.
Now they might be different than the stars we used to, they might be about
bigger, but they would still go through the same cycle of nuclear
fusion and element production.
And to me, that's really interesting, if that's true, because it means that at
least one piece of the fine tuning argument, I know there are other factors
to that, other fundamental properties, if you tweak them a little bit,
would be seemingly problematic.
But that suggests to me that it's, first of all, maybe the universe isn't
particularly well tuned for life as we know it.
I mean, we don't actually know, because we've only got the one instance that we
know about right here on the Earth.
So we don't know whether this is a fertile universe or not a fertile
universe.
And that, to me, would change, suppose 500 years ago, or 400 years ago,
first telescopes, we just saw life everywhere.
Everybody had big neon signs out across the universe saying, we are here.
What are you up to?
Oh, yeah, Renaissance.
Lovely.
We had that, you know, a thousand years earlier.
Then we'd have lived with a universe replete with living organisms,
and I'm not even sure the question would come up that the universe was fine-tuned.
If what, I didn't quite catch the last scenario.
Suppose the universe, we knew we had known that the universe was packed with
life, that the planet everywhere, and all of them had life, and it was all
sophisticated, technological, it had evolved in many different ways, and so on.
I just wonder whether we'd even ask the question.
And the thing is, we don't know how fertile the universe is.
So sorry, I'm loading this with lots of...
One thing I want to say, okay, start with a response to your second point you made
about assuming carbon-based life.
Most of the arguments actually don't.
For example, the fine-tuning of the cosmological constant, which governs the
expansion rate of space, that simply, if it wasn't within a very small range,
typically estimate as one part in 10 to the 120th power, very, very small number,
that the universe would expand too rapidly for galaxies and stars to form,
so there just wouldn't be planets, there wouldn't be stars, and then you're not even
going to get any kind of complexity.
Or if you looked at the level of laws, if you didn't have like this,
strong nuclear force was long-range force, wasn't just right, you wouldn't have atoms.
And concerning your case, so first of all, I say, the more general, if somebody's
correctly formulating this, most cases won't involve, are not simply focused on
carbon-based life.
There was that case with Fred Hoyle initially with the carbon and oxygen,
but most of them aren't.
And the second thing, in the example you mentioned of the star, I don't think that
it's just whether stars could exist or not with the gravitational-constra-fying
structure constant.
It wasn't just a matter of whether stars could exist, but whether they would have
right temperature last long enough for life to exist.
And there's also, if you change those, there's planetary effects, like the ability to
retain an atmosphere if you increase the strength of gravity, it can fairly easy
to show that you're forced into increasing the surface force on a planet to retain
an atmosphere.
And so, you know, gravity is very weak as a force.
If you didn't dimensionless units, about one in ten to the 38th power of the
strong nuclear force, and if you increase gravity by, let's say, a thousandfold,
then only planets have 30 times the surface force strength of experience, it would be
less, a lot less, I think, ideal for our kind of life.
So, I think you can, the argument actually, when you start talking about the conditions
being even optimal, you might even be able to get light, but it's going to be, as you
increase the surface force, it's going to be a lot harder to do much of anything.
So, I would agree that figuring out all these secondary ramifications is tough, right?
And it may be that you would eliminate regions of this expanded parameter space.
But, no, I mean, the example I gave, that range, and I'm sorry, is just getting into
sort of horribly specific physics. So, we should veer off from this again.
That range I gave for strength of gravity, strength of electromagnetism, is the range
from which you would derive sufficiently long-lived stars with the right sort of
properties to produce, as far as we can tell, I mean, you'd have to run a lot of
physics simulations, an abundance of heavier elements, not so dissimilar to what we
have at the moment. No, I mean, I raised it, not really just to sort of attack this idea,
but it's interesting to me that, you know, and maybe this almost relates to what you
would say, I mean, we impose design on things, right? That's us.
The universe may have nothing to do with that, right?
We tend to impose design more than anything else.
Here's Adam, this is what you just look at, a range of physically possible values,
and then you look at those values that are allowed for complexity, and some of them are
very straight, much more straightforward, you don't have to run the kind of simulations
which we like the concept. Yeah, I mean, I think the cosological concept is a good one.
It's much more straightforward. Right, right. And the other ones are the
planetary effects of change in gravity are pretty straightforward.
But, we bring it back to this idea just how messy all this stuff is, basically.
I mean, the best example of that is, I mean, even if you bought into the creator
kind of stuff, that Adam and Eve, everything, I mean, it's looking around, we all look
different, we wouldn't, because DNA replication is incredibly
messy, and that there's, you know, all of these things,
whether it's, you know, talking about things within the aspect of the beginning
of the universe, to, like, you know, things that, like, you know,
e.coli mutating in petri dishes around the city in different labs.
I mean, there's a lot of messiness and a lot of stochastic kind of things that just
happened to all of these things. And if it weren't messy, we wouldn't beat him.
Exactly. Well, let me, I don't know if you were.
No, I was just going to add to that. And we, as I think you're saying,
are predisposed to see the design and everything, even if
it's created by random processes with, you know,
additional constraints on top. And that's part of not just our brains, but animal brains
in general, that are designed to look for pattern. That itself is adaptive.
Because the brain or any other
such organ is the finite size and
can only do this little in order to enable the moving
vehicle. I've been listening to your discussion.
I don't, I don't, I don't use a lot of our brain. Well, so if you say it's
too small, why don't we use more of it? No, the point I'm making is
that from one generation to the next, we
were exposed to more information, more observations,
reams and reams of this. And of course we
absorb it in the forms of principles and the correlations, but not
number by number in the immense volumes of
tables of data. We, we become
more knowledgeable through, through hierarchical
not through mindless accumulation of volume.
That was the point I was making. I wanted to contribute this discussion
because several points were made here.
The, first of all, I was learning from the
exchange between the two of you, which is basically about physics. The topic today
is Design in Nature, which is something that is familiar to everyone.
It's something for us mortals here, somewhere halfway
between the stars and the protons and the quarks.
Now, many people, as you
implied, equate the
quark, the proton and the infinitesimal with, quote,
even more fundamental. Smaller
does not mean more fundamental. Fundamental fundus in Latin means
at bottom. Look at the Statue of Liberty, the pedestal
is bigger than the statue. The thing,
or the fire brick in Roman architecture, is
finite size. You can kill a man with it. And it is fundamental
because before that, the buildings are really,
really miserable and crumbling earthquakes and so forth.
Most of them, but not after the fire brick. You have
these vaults. You have architecture of a different kind. After the fire
brick came, the steel reinforced concrete all over this country,
skyscrapers and iron bridges. Okay? So
that's fundamental. A
finite size elemental construct,
this thing, the brick, the steel in the cement.
These are fundamental because they are
literally at the bottom of
the
surface. So, in science, unfortunately, language
basically has a life of its own.
Some words are so useful that they end up being used,
actually misused in other places.
The life
carbon based. Of course, that's the view if you
equate the design nature only with
animals, with the biosphere, you see.
But the design nature is general. It's not about that.
So, there's a famous question, what is life?
And I think the answer is very easy if you know
thermodynamics. Because in
thermodynamics, this is the part of physics that had to be born after
the steam engine, the
heat engine, 200 years ago.
So, this is actually Maxwell in Cambridge.
One of the key concepts in physics is that of
the dead state. Death is
resolved as an answer to a question in physics.
Dead means in a system, which means this that you're discussing.
That system is in the dead state. If in it, nothing
moves. That also means nothing morphs. Nothing changes.
Well, the antonym of that is the
life state of a system. It is a system in a
state occupied by flow, meaning
movement. And the change. Change in configuration.
I mentioned earlier change cannot happen without freedom to change.
That's another basic concept in physics.
Process means change. Change of state from this
being of, say, the part of water
to this other being of the part of water.
So, all these things together, taking us from what everybody
understands and accepts, which is dead state in physics.
Life state, the antonym of the first. And then
change in state, which happens because of freedom. That change is evolution.
And the direction of that change is not the haphazard.
It is in one direction, which is that of
changes that facilitate
the occurrence of configurations that
offer greater access. Or all the way to
more efficiency, to smarter economics,
to faster speech, or cheaper communicating between entities that want
to communicate. Or the fact that it is
called economies of scale. The fact that it is easier to move as a group
not as individuals. And on and on, and this is the
river water, the two people entering the stadium,
this is physics. It's everything
showing the same tendency to morph and to surprise the observer
with surprisingly the same kind of pattern.
Pattern is not designed.
Design is a flow configuration with
freedom, but also with a message.
I get the impression the way you talk
is that all of these questions
that are being raised and all of the debates that are happening
that you seem to present it as if you already have all the answers.
And I'm a little bit puzzled by that because
obviously these are unsettled issues.
Well look, since you put it that way, I have to respond by the way.
That goes without saying.
No. On the contrary.
I'm the ignorant who
came to this very old and big
table of discussion. I'm talking about in physics, in biology.
I'm from engineering. I'm a person who
basically was not supposed to be here. But it so happens.
You are here. No, I'm talking about the
in... It is only now that I published, meaning
20 years ago, I published in physics in biology. Previously I was preaching to the
choir. My peers in engineering
get it. They are simply not invited to discussions on
design, even though the word meaning
design is what people do. Incidentally,
this thing with the signal in Latin, then it became
design in Italian. The west got
the science that we cherish today from
the Renaissance. That's how we really got it. And then through the French,
so it means the sign. It doesn't mean
the act of designing something and making it.
That's something totally different. Design happens.
But to finish your point, when I started
to talk about the physics of evolution,
in this most general sense, not as chemistry of carbon,
in the most general sense, I was surprised
to hear from my peers, those who came to the construct
a look from physics in biology, that what I'm telling them from
my direction is in fact
not only familiar to them, but it covers
what the contemporary scientists regard as known
in their various compartments like departments on a campus
that do not talk to each other. So that's the reason... I think good questions.
I want to go back to a previous comment.
You made about that the brain is
programmed to see design in nature.
Now, one could take that as the brain is
programmed to mislead us because there's not near as much design
in nature as the brain seems to want to think. In certain areas
that's certainly true.
But I would want to point out that from the
time of the scientific revolution, you can, I could cite Morris Klein on this
who said the assumption everybody was making
was that
since the time of the Pythagoreans that nature was mathematically designed, meaning
in particular mathematically put together to realize
elegant mathematics. And that, during the
last century, ever since then, has been just enormously fruitful.
You have people like Paul Dirac, one of the
major founders of quantum mechanics, says, you know, the equation must be beautiful.
It's more important than even that experiment because sometimes when they pursued
beauty in the equations and they seemed to conflict with the experiment
later it turned out to be correct. That was Einstein's approach.
It was...look, he would actually, as
major biographer said, he would think of it. Even though he didn't believe in a
idea that he would think to himself, if I were God, what would I do?
In other words, how would be the most beautiful mathematics
to put this together? And that was a guide for him.
And it's been a continual guide and a very successful one.
So I wouldn't want to make the inference that a brain being...
I think we have to resist the inference. That means it's going to mislead us. It's actually amazing
that that kind of idea has been so successful.
At an area we wouldn't expect it because if
it was programmed to...for reproductive
success to see design and everything and to see these elegant
patterns, we wouldn't initially expect
it to work at the underlying level when the mathematics is
far removed from what we see
on the everyday level.
I think I would also understand you that some of the mathematical
beauty may not be as...
I think there is enormous
beauty in this context for mathematics. I think it's very interesting
point that you raised. As you were talking, I was thinking about this
and thinking, okay, so why do we do this? Why do our brains
do this? Is it because, you know, again,
we've evolved presumably like other species
so that our brains are part of a data
processing system, right? And we're bombarded
by millions of pieces of information all the time for every
nerve ending, everything we see, everything we hear, smell,
you know, pheromones that are floating around
in this room that triggers what's the thing. And it's a lot to handle, right?
But, you know, there's a tiger waiting to eat me over there
so I'd better make some good judgment decisions
and I just... you know, this is a very naive way of thinking about it.
I suspect, but is that... does that seem like a plausible
reason why we see patterns, we see
beauty in certain equations? There was some
report very recently talking about the study of people doing math
and I think even looking at FMRI scans, why they were solving
mathematical puzzles and getting that pleasure,
I don't know if it was dopamine or whatever, does that
make sense? Yeah, I'll just mention a quick example
from Fish. Obviously, where our brains are
more complex and understanding our predispositions
is more complicated, but there's a very lovely
long-term study of guppies in Trinidad and these guppies,
I'm sure a lot of you have had guppies as pets, they have these beautiful
tails, very colorful, and the tails are...
the males have the colorful tails and it's thought that these are to attract
females. The females choose the males based on the color of the tails, which are
kind of this bright orange color in this particular area.
And so for a long time the research was completely focused
on why the females prefer these beautiful colorful
tails, and it's lovely, they look designed, right?
And then some smart team came along and thought
to examine what the guppies were eating and it turned out that
these guppies prefer these orange berries that
fall into the river that have a very similar color and
pattern to the males' tails. So it turned out the females,
some neurological level, had a preference for orange, for this bright orange color
of the males' tails, and that on an evolutionary time scale got translated
into a preference for males with these bright orange tails.
So something that looks completely unrelated, turns out...
How does that apply to humans? Yes, good question.
Maybe somebody with a...
So how does that connect up with our brain spin program to see
that there may be at an evolutionary time scale some
predisposition due to selective
forces that we don't see around us anymore,
but that may have been part of our evolutionary history.
It still would be the case that why would we expect that to work
in areas that are so far removed from
what helps us in our long evolutionary past
survive, namely at this fundamental mathematical level, which is actually
very abstract. That's why people have a lot of
difficulty learning quantum mechanics or general relativity
because the mathematics is far different from even...
It's a difficulty explaining how we can even do mathematics in the normal
from an evolutionary perspective. People have worked on that.
But that's the ordinary counting fractions.
That sort of mathematics is very far removed. And as Eugene Vigner wrote a famous essay
on this, as you pointed out, it's chosen. The mathematics
is chosen for its elegance and fruitfulness mathematically
in being able to, let's say, solve equations. And so why would it work so
well there? That's the puzzle I'm pointing to.
I guess, I mean, you know, quantum mechanics...
Right, I mean, to do quantum mechanics you have to know...
I mean, mathematics as we have it.
And so I'm just...
Yeah, we see quantum mechanics
but that beauty wasn't arrived at like that.
No, but the mathematics, using that mathematics with the complex numbers
was developed before the arrival of quantum mechanics
and it's essential, either that or something isomorphic
to it, is essential for quantum mechanics. And that was developed because it was
enormously fruitful and complex numbers are real number, plus
an imaginary number which you could think of as a square root of negative 1.
And so they were developed because it was enormously one reason
you can solve like third order or more
or any polynomial using imaginary numbers, but you can't using the real numbers.
There's no... And so the normal...
enormously fruitful algebraically and in other ways.
And it was developed all independently yet for aesthetic reasons
because of its mathematical fruitfulness and yet that's just the system
that nature is
the mathematics that suits nature.
I wanted to just... you didn't finish your point about the fish.
No, it was pretty much finished.
Yeah, I'm hoping that somebody that used a little bit more about the fish and brain
could take it a little further.
The conclusion being that in terms of
what was making the female fish choose
that, that that was...
was not really a design, it was more something else.
Right, there was a predisposition that looked to us to be
sort of design related at first glance but turned out to have
a deeper evolutionary history that shaped
this preference based on food.
So the ability, maybe the thrill of adding
two numbers together is related
to the ability to think, oh, if I go over there I get
two berries instead of one berry.
I'm going to talk to our colleagues at Columbia and say, very
Candel and stuff is like that he's made his career.
One was in the world prize just on the basis of how that
every single interaction you ever have, everything you ever look at,
not just changes your brain chemically, it changes it physically,
is that new synapses become larger and hotter.
And that there's been a huge amount, I mean, basically we know about the brains of
three things, kind of, we know some about humor, we know some about
mouse, we know a little bit about sea elegance, if you want to say they have a brain or not,
and then a little bit about zebrafish, but certainly I mean they've been
able to demonstrate that in some experimental organisms as well. So like that
we can talk about this set of complex mathematics but
these are relatively new things that are basically the things that have come since
Newton's time. And that, so our brains, when we look at mathematics
today, look fundamentally different than somebody who would have thought
about those same sorts of problems before those mathematics were different.
And not just in a chemical way, I'm just studying and understanding it, but in a physical way as well.
I wanted to bring the discussion back to
design and nature and respond to
things you brought up or actually both of you. Why
is the brain program as well to
detect pattern? You see that, by the way,
right now in the famous story about the NSA
using big data in order to discern
patterns that are useful. And that's the answer to your second point
about beauty, okay? Why is the pattern useful to the
NSA so that the government could act faster
in the direction of protecting all of us. The same with
the animal, obviously one million years
after another million learning that what is good
for it is actually
pleasure because to live is the option that we all like as opposed
to becoming the victim. And so beauty
in physics is a part of this evolutionary
design, meaning changes that we make
every day and how we move in order to get going, to go
through life easier. We like a simple equation
because we get it and we move on. My best example
is why statistics has been proven that most people
like to look at images shaped like this. Like
the business card where like the computer screen or like the screen of the cinema.
The shape happens to have a length to hide ratio
approximately the same as the golden ratio. That's a
coincidence. But why do people like this shape?
Why? Because this is the area that's the easiest, the fastest
to scan with two eyes, okay? This is the animal
in the business of surviving and getting out of the
way of the predator and looking at the world which is flat.
This is why the animal has two eyes on the horizontal and by the way
the area, the ocular area of the two eyes
is an area approximated by this shape. And that is
then the beauty which goes hand in hand with locomotion
and with greater access and with the survival.
So you have the intangibles like beauty as of course
all the way to economics that actually belongs in physics,
so I'm sorry.
I'm just wondering if anybody comment
on evolutionary biologists. On
Simon Conway morosis thesis I'm just wondering which, because that's I think
very relevant to the discussion here of that.
That the built in constraints already there from physics,
chemistry, etc. makes certain, almost inevitable
certain kinds of organisms. So he's bucking the idea
particularly popularized by Stephen J. Gould
that if you ran the evolutionary tape over again
you'd get very, very different types of life forms and
that would be a miracle to get, a miracle in the sense of being
a very, very improbable occurrence to get beings like us
with our level of intelligence. But he thinks that
the evidence of convergence of things like the compound eye occurring
independently many different times in evolutionary history
indicate that these sorts of things
are much more inevitable than we once thought.
So there is a sort of inevitable set of patterns that are going to occur in nature
despite a lot of the
accidental character of mutations. And I'm wondering what you think of that piece
and the comments you have on. I would certainly agree with Simon on that one
because I think that the evidence of convergence is so great that we can see
that the same kinds of teeth of occurring
in different kinds of vertebrates who eat similar kinds of things
that are totally unrelated from one another. We see that the same kinds of
what I was alluding to before of these empty ecological spaces that are occurring
and lots of different groups be they insects, be they bats, be they birds
which occur over and over and over again. I mean that there is
something which is just some physical constraint which is keeping
it out of that select that
we see things like that the sizes and shapes of eggs something that
our lab has studied and things that you see that
different groups which have lots of different sizes, lots of different kinds of things that they
come up with the same shapes all the time. So they don't go way out of bounds.
So it's really a
I mean I think that if you were having the evolutionary tape over again
we might not be mammals, we might not be related to things. Maybe we
wouldn't exist but the kinds of biodiversity you see on the planet would be partitioned
pretty much the same way. Just like what was partitioned with totally different animals
during the Paleozoic period 200 million years ago and then when
the big extinction at the end of the Paleozoic it came back
during the Cretaceous period with the same kinds of reefs that came back again in the
Cenozoic as well with the same kinds of reefs the animals to a
non-biologist would look pretty much the same but they're totally unrelated to one another.
I would add I contribute
the addendum that it's
this thing that you're describing is actually predictable and it's not only about the population of these beings
but actually the movement of these beings
the locomotion is in fact the physics. The shape of the egg is
physics is predictable. The frequency of the egg laying
is physics and is predictable.
And the as the configuration of animal mass movement on the globe is
no different than the vascular configuration of
the movement of all the other water which is much older which is the water in the river basin
or the movement of air currents on the
surface of the globe. It's hierarchical and
with design. I did some reading
about my colleagues here and I developed
the questions and one is to you if you'd like to address it because time is running short.
Would you comment on two things. One
I hear my colleagues in academia
ringing their hands about the conflict between science and religion
that's one and second about your own interest
and specialty and a theory of atonement.
Well I think the theory of atonement
is going to be somewhat off topic but if you want me to comment on it I can
but in terms of is there a conflict between science
and religion I would say no I think science and religion
at a deeper level there's a superficial conflict. For example young
earth creationist with their literal interpretation of Genesis
is in conflict with what we know from
science that human beings
apes and other creatures are genetically related so there's
the common ancestry thesis but at a deeper level
I think the kind of let's say the belief in God in particular
and if you want to go more particularly Christian
the belief in logos the reason
that the world is an intelligible
whole and order in an intelligible way
is deeply consonant with science in fact most people
in fact all the people who began the scientific revolution
believed that and thought that Galileo thought that the
universe was written in the language of mathematics and likewise
Kepler but what you have to be careful of is
what level you're looking for this in
what level you attribute to chance and what level you
attribute to a more fundamental kind of design
for example Kepler in he spent
the early years trying to
figure out a mathematical order to the actual
distance the planets were away from the sun so we look for the
5 platonic solids and that never worked out because
the distance of planets are that's a matter of chance not necessity
but they're actual elliptical orbits and the speed in which they
go that's a matter of physical necessity so he finally eventually found the
three Kepler's three laws of motion which led to Newton
at that point so I would say no there's no
at a deep level there are consonant there's only this superficial
um conflict
I'm sorry what would you say but it sounds good to me
so I don't think the conflict
but I mean what we get from the popular image
is this conflict and it was also a thesis promoted by
which the historian friends of mine say and people are history
in the history of the science of religion whether or not
their believers are and god or not
like Anderson Dixon White I think he's the first president
of Cornell University promoted this perpetual conflict
thesis and history was really really bad history
the footnotes didn't go anywhere and so that
from the historian's perspective it's way more complex than that there's been
skirmishes but there's also been a lot of support for
science from the religious community so
it's it's it's it's
that would be my religion I mean
I would agree with all of this history absolutely I mean someone like Kepler
was deeply religious that's my understanding but
he also felt that that was perfectly compatible
with this this empirically studied quantitative
universe but I mean
he was even capable of taking quite risky
steps because my understanding is before Kepler people
assumed that the movement of planets was all in perfect circles
and Kepler took this leap to say well maybe they're ellipses
which is pretty shocking for someone
who was motivated by the idea of
the underlying idea of elegance that heavens were elegantly ordered would give you
perfect circles the most symmetrical but he was willing to break that but
it was still that underlying idea of an elegant order to the universe
it's just you can't be you can't get too fixated
on a certain version of that I mean Einstein got fixated on a certain version
of that and never could really accept quantum mechanics so
and sometimes a religious motivation
can be very helpful I mean the developer the Montre who developed
the big bang theory
was religious and it was people like Fred
Hoyle who opposed it
strongly until the evidence came in in the 1960s even then he opposed
I think he never did accept it he
couldn't imagine the universe having a beginning but somebody from
a kind of theistic perspective that was much easier to imagine
Einstein couldn't imagine the universe having a beginning and that's why he
introduced originally the cosmological constant to make to get an eternal
universe so in that particular case you can see that
actually the religious believed actually helped the acceptability
of that the big bang theory so you are saying
that the universe on a surface level religion and science
may seem not compatible but on a deeper level
they are compatible right how are they compatible
there I mean the idea of
theism that's what I was saying the idea that there's a god who created
the universe and intelligence behind it would lead you
to expect that there'd be in the structure of the universe would be
intelligible it would lead you to expect it would be an
elegant elegantly structured at a fundamental level so
and that we could understand and that's then a mainstay of science is that we
could actually understand the universe which wasn't given to us that we
most cultures didn't assume we could really understand the underlying nature of things
but how would you ever like as a scientist when you work in two
domains you work in mathematics where you work with mathematical proofs
then you work within the construct of an observational list which you test hypotheses
how is the idea of god a testable hypothesis
I mean how would you test that? well I mean the thing is you're demanding
that everything all your what you're assuming is
all knowledge is scientific knowledge and all the hypotheses you have about the world
can be gained by science I mean a simple reputation
of that is your own consciousness you'll never get to your own consciousness by a
scientific study you know your conscious because you're aware
I'm not sure I know my consciousness by a certain your conscious okay
or moral if you hold a moral throughs you're not getting them by means
of scientific investigation so I wouldn't subscribe to god
as a scientific hypothesis I think that's a big mistake to do that
so you can't
test god to test the god hypothesis isn't that a slippery slope
when it comes on to other things then and say well this is really scientific
well there could be evidence for things without being scientific evidence I mean
I think you have evidence in mathematics which is not strictly speaking empirical evidence
there's evidence I mentioned for but as a formality to it at least to
still prove so there's a difference between evidence and scientific evidence
scientific evidence is a narrow one particular area that's been very successful
of kinds of evidence but there's other kinds of evidence or reasons
that people could have let me clarify why I asked you about
science and religion both in the evolution
of Homo sapiens are add-ons they are
human constructs things we attach to ourselves
and the vice versa obviously in order to live
more easily science is obviously that
why do you think now in your own
specialty and domain why do you think
religion was
obviously invented, discovered and adopted by humans
a long time ago not the Simono Theis and
to which you are referring why is religion
that's a very complex question but I think it has two
there's a huge question but I would say
two things I think people do have a sense of the transcendent and so
on one side the philosophical side
they have a sense of the transcendent they have a sense of
moral value and once you have the sense of moral value
if you see let's say evil in the world
people that commit evil often
live better lives than those that do good then it seems morality
in many people's minds require that you know the
good ultimately are not worse off at least
than the evil are better officers there's a sort of what happens to a person
and but their moral character is eventually must
coincide so then you either get just on naturalistic
basis from those kind of things you either get a having a hell or reincarnation
system and then there's a sense of
transcendent reality I mean that counting
for maybe the order you see in the world that the world exists at all
but then on the there's a whole bunch more religion than that and there's a lot of
in sociological explanations religion helps
group cohesiveness and
we see that throughout the world so then there's a whole bunch of sociological issues
that arise which is another
big factor in religion and then if you believe in revelation then there can be
you know the revelatory side but if you just give a naturalistic or merely
philosophical account I think those are the two two big ones
and group cohesiveness from an evolutionary perspective is going to help the survival
of the grid but but there you go these things these good things that you're
enumerating could be contributed by a lover of science
all the way to wonderful mathematics better
engineering how to build the city
how to stay away from danger your name
the place okay so the urge the human
urge to live more easily save for longer
is in the very beginning and the earliest
version in my view at least the word knowledge of the history of man
the earliest way to
to put that urge to use meaning to use nature
to live with nature to live with the environment
was to was through religion
so I am I was curious to know whether
like many of my colleagues you you regard that you think that
people in religion should fear science and vice versa
people in science should fear religion to me they're all
in fact human religion being older
and a religion with science is definitely a much better
add-on than religion without science
why I agree religion with science is much better
than religion okay I'm going to go to questions
please come up to the microphone
please come up to the microphone and
thanks be gentle to the questions
and keep your comments in the form of a question
how you doing?
so the question that I have is
I guess pretty much I kind of like going off the last
thing given the fact that
okay so the question being couldn't mathematics itself be
quote unquote god right I'm putting in air quotes for a reason
or couldn't the not couldn't knowledge itself
be quote unquote god or couldn't sort of
the idea of like what you were saying before
in terms of like that transmutative
nature of things in and of itself
or pattern itself that we sort of
assign understanding to
couldn't that in and of itself be god like does
god necessarily have to be personification or
anthropomorphization of what we see
like couldn't the intelligence itself be god
thank you you want to tackle that yeah I'll tackle that
I think in the I mean the kind of popular image you get
of god as a god out there that's very anthropomorphic image and molding
things etc I mean when I think of god
I think of it just as that an underlying intelligence
that grounds everything so that the idea is is that if you
ask the question what is and I know you
have comments about fundamental what's when you go all the way back to reality
what do you find is reality ultimately impersonal is that the ultimate
story so is it just matter in motion for instance
or so and then consciousness arises out of matter
so consciousness is sort of an epiphenomenon of the material
or is that consciousness
is the most fundamental and then when you get consciousness you get mind
usually goes along with it and will and intelligence
and mathematics
has been the conceptualizations of that intelligence that's one view
of mathematics and so
in that conception of god then it's really thinking
that it's not an anthropomorphic conception of god out there but
a reality a conscious reality that's underlying and sustaining
everything and so that it's a question of which route
do you go at the very beginning of what's most fundamental
which leads you in these two different directions
let me also address your points first of all
mathematics is not physics physics is nature
physics is what happens I like the
Latin version of it nature or notura which is the personification
of into a lady who gives birth to everything
so that is physics now in the history of science the
description and the reasoning of these things that we've seen
nature came first meaning was born out of this
notura as geometry
and that was a very cumbersome argument
to teach all the way to
the school of Plato which said
he who cannot do geometry is not allowed to enter
very difficult so then it was simplified
algebra, trigonometry
or calculus so in the beginning geometric arguments
from Newton and so mathematics is a
evolutionary process of simplifying the
book of physics that's what it is
so no English is a much simpler language
than say French and Latin that's why
English now has taken the world taken over the world
I would disagree just like I didn't make it to screen
I think in many cases actually the mathematics preceded the physics like I mentioned
the complex numbers so it wasn't actually useful in physics to quantum
mechanics in the 1930s but complex numbers
in fact I think it goes back to the 17
imaginary numbers in the development of the complex number system
in the 18th and 19th century
clarify just a second the name for the discipline
is new it comes from the second half of the 1800s
before that it was called mechanics and it is
called as the Greeks and mechanics is the science of
figures, bodies
well the ones that statically were described as geometry now these things
the pulleys, the ropes, the buildings, the making of the buildings
was mechanics the building of the ditches and trenches and roads
so mechanics is the original name for what I was talking about but the question was
could mathematics be God so if you say physics
could be God?
well I understand that there are all God's laws
okay so there's the end to that okay next question
I'm wondering in considering these difficult questions
whether the panelists are really so sure themselves
as it appears why so difficult people say I don't really
know it seems obvious to me given the dispute amongst
you all that no one really knows
do you have doubts or do you really think you're right
did you do know about what about life
why things are the way they are?
that's where scientists we don't know
but I did not say the beginning of the question because they don't hear
well would you speak slow enough? this one you have people can be so sure
themselves about why things are the way they are
given the arguments and disputes and why people can't say I don't know
it seems like a lot of these questions people really don't know
but very few people they may share with them
in secret yes yeah before this meeting started
we're having a round table in a back room there
and Dr. Narcissianne
you brought up the fact that most people think they know more
than they know I wanted to add to that
that most professors think they know more than they know
except England so
that's the way we are okay and very few
except those who are in a hurry to go home after a lecture
or a conference say gee I don't excellent question but
I don't know so it's a useful answer
to many of these questions but the urge
to pursue the question especially when it arrives
unexpectedly out of an honest audience
that courage is actually very valuable
and from me to my students they're very important to teach
because most people do not get it that they're actually
free to question authority thank you
if you can't propose some experiment that would prove you're wrong
or right make some prediction and say we're going to do some experiment to show
it comes out the way I think it does or doesn't do how is that different
than you did the work and physics theory is full of these examples
but in terms of your theory oh sure
here is the story of I predicted the evolution
of the speed and sports I predicted it that was in the spring
of 2008 that was months before the Beijing Olympics
I predicted that the next winners in sprint ends will be
bigger okay and with a mathematical formula
very simple a equals b kind of formula
and I submitted this as a letter to nature
with a cover letter in which I said that dear editors
my colleagues please publish this immediately because in just two months
from now this will be shown to be correct and they of course
because I'm from engineering decided not even
to review my contribution
my contribution was on the rebound published a few months
later in the Journal of Experimental Biology in Cambridge not a lightweight journal
meaning here are the facts
comparative biology journal
but in Beijing in July my prediction
turned out to be correct I do not predict the names
of the winners but I predicted their sizes and their speeds
you see but that's not proving a fundamental physical
law or all it is as it is as proving a retrospect
meaning a hindsight that everything that you brought up
earlier with the insects and the so-called convergent evolution
should be happening this way that the
bigger should be faster not just you know waving your hands
but in a long this in accord with this precise formula
that is to predict that it was not questioned
in the past is the proof that you are waiting
oh the question how many predictions did you make that didn't come true that we never heard about
the doctor already comes in the fact that that has not happened yet
okay thank you you want to say something
I do do you have time
I just have a couple of comments I really enjoyed this it's wonderful I haven't thought this much
about these issues since college and until the last selection of course
and I wanted to make a couple of comments
and they would raise questions regarding the existence
of God I think the gentleman in a lighter jacket I
was here late so I don't really have all your names
mentioned that you can't test the existence of God unless I got that wrong
and if that is true then how can you describe God that's one question
you might want to reference a show
that Stephen Colbert had a few weeks ago a few months ago where Ricky Gervais
was there and he proposed a following thought experiment
which is that if humanity were wiped out or all civilization were wiped out
what would we recreate the same religions or
would we recreate the same physics and mathematics which is more likely
and Colbert was I think stunned by that which is
impressive considering his deep religious beliefs and his mind
I also wanted to comment on what you mentioned
about what I think is synchronicity which is kind of
parallel well I guess parallel evolutionary
appearances due to different processes and I think that's an important thing
to keep in mind and the last thing I want to say is I did some research
when I was a resident I'm a pathologist by training
that did describe symmetries in biology which I can discuss
with you privately if you're interested that speak to some very basic
primal mathematical principles I don't think it ever saw the light of day
but it was fascinating sorry a lot
so the two of you I think are questions
I think what I heard you write you said
if you can't test whether God exists how can you describe
God well I mean we don't have
I can describe God how an idea what consciousness is because I'm conscious
and I have an idea of what being an agent is and knowledge is
so I don't see where you'd have to test something to be able to
describe it I could describe on
a very very distant planet that is
what physicists would say is outside our light cone which means we'll never
be able to determine whether it's there or not I can describe
there's a certain kind of being on the planet let's say a unicorn to view a description of
the unicorn so I can describe without ever being able to test
whether that's the case or that there's extraterrestrial intelligence
outside our light cone so I don't see how the two are connected
together I think you'd have to have some sort of
access to the properties you're using to describe the thing but
that doesn't require an ability to be able to test whether it exists or not
would you like to comment sure yeah first I'll just
say that I like to think of God as a flying spaghetti monster
that's a big movement among evolutionary biologists to
recast religion of flying spaghetti monster but with regard
to synchronicity and convergence I mean one of
an interesting topic that's come up in evolutionary biology recently
is trying to understand convergence not just
from the framework of
a common natural selective force which is always how
since Darwin it's been interpreted when you see two things that look the same
you say aha they're under similar adaptive pressure
but now I think with new
new tools genomics new tools
and developmental biology and cell biology we can start to understand
the kind of canalization that is the molecular it constraints the molecular
level that drive convergence in ways that
may not be as related to adaptive pressure as we think
thank you any other questions
it seems to me that all of the members of the panel
with the exception of Professor
Bajan would be successfully avoided the topic at hand and I think the topic at hand is
it says design and nature
is really is there design and nature and what I heard from
Professor Bajan was that nature
designs itself and it does it through the mechanism of evolution
which is underpinned by the law of physics
and that means and that really is
something which is in its own way post creation
or post development in some way so it still leaves open
the question as to whether or not there was design
or a designer how did evolution how did the law of physics
come about?
who wants to tackle that? Let me read a brief
in my latest book The Physics of Life the answer
to your point is I agree with what you bring up
is that evolution
which really means changing design with the
perceivable discernible direction over time
was one earth and everything
everywhere else from the beginning
and I just want to follow up with a better understanding
of the nature design and nature. You understand what the living is
and I think the water flowing down here
and the water flowing down here
wants to keep moving then it keeps trying various ways
of doing and it starts to look just
that you destroy that or you destroy that
as an evolution and a removal of part of the water.
It's a survival of... it's an evolution of the flow
architecture and the river basin is just one part of it
it's the circuit executed by water in nature
first there is the rain the rain falls on the ground
the droplets while falling down
a quiet shape that tends to
minimize drag. There we go. So that's the
quality embryo that gives birth to the river basin
river basin is the wet mud in the beginning then you have the
riverlets and then the hill slopes and the rivers
and so all the way to the delta you forgot to mention delta which is the river basin
and then the river is just like the breathing in and breathing out
and then there is what happens to the water from the river
basin either evaporation from the ocean or from the Kalahari desert
in the case of the Oka-Langua delta. So and then
the evaporated humid air is light and it rises
with the undulating rivers you see meandering rivers
of plumes which then circulate on the
same world map as the winds more easily
so this entire so this is where I actually asked you about
the atonement it's about not only the thing that
you bring up which is the river basin it's about the river basin
flowing together with everything else with the so-called environment
or with the nature itself so the physics
is holistic the laws of physics are
obeyed by anything everywhere and anytime
and that's why this discussion at this topic I
commend you for putting it together as a title is extremely timely
and it is not about biology it is not about technology evolution
either it's in fact it's about everything
that has evolving design. Okay so maybe okay so
okay so I'll just say you know design
for me is such a loaded word as a scientist
because the last thing I want to say is that anything is designed
because I don't believe that I don't think anything is designed
design is something we impose after the fact on
what we see around us and it's because of our squirmy little
mammalian brains doing the things but
it doesn't mean that there aren't some really extraordinary questions
and big questions so for example 13.8 billion
years ago the Big Bang the universe was not the way it is now
it was extremely uniform it was hot it had
almost no structure to it somehow 13.8
billion years later it's made structures out of itself
capable of recognizing that fact
that's a big question right I mean that and it's a big scientific question
for me and I think that's you know that's the
more interesting thing how did that happen I agree
it's physics but I don't know how to connect all the dots
from 13.8 billion years ago to today and I feel that
sometimes I look you know we the fact
that we impose this notion of design and form and shape
and elegance and beauty on the world around us
has been useful in some respects but we don't know if that's the best thing
to do for unearthing the deeper truths I don't know
I really don't so I just wanted to put that out there and I just wanted to say
I say design to me and I kind of go into a quivering
and as I want to run out the door just to say that
let me know too well do you want to say something
well not really I mean to me like it's like you know being a scientist
for me it's not about like figuring out the big questions and all this other kind of stuff
is just I'm just no seriously I just do it because it's fun
it's creative like you know like I mean it's like that when we discovered like
it's like you know I'm known for studying dinosaurs and I can't stand dinosaurs
but you know it's just a way which
like you know when we figured out what color dinosaurs were it's not like we cared we just wanted to see if we were clever enough to do it
and to figure out a way that we could use the quantum radiation and stuff to be able to like do it
and that you know so I can mean a lot of it is just
it's just that because it gives us a you know I use science as a mechanism for us to be able to
you know understand all the way from the most fundamental questions in the world
to like the lint of figuring out what color one kind of dinosaur was 130 million years ago so like that it's just
it allows us to be able to do that in a repeatable and fundamental way by
you know using mathematics but using technology by asking the right questions
and it's just a way to approach the world in that way so
Anybody else?
Okay. Can I ask you another question?
Oh yes you can ask another question.
So
So what is there?
It's there.
Just fine. I can tell everybody can hear me.
In terms of like
so in terms of sort of like
answering this question
wouldn't answering the question require like
some sort of multi-field understanding
that for the most part like
well that's two questions
so wouldn't it require some sort of multi-field understanding that we're just not
really capable of in any one's
particular 90 year lifetime?
It's probably intractable. I mean there's nothing wrong with that.
There's nothing wrong with saying we can't do that and I don't know that
because like one of the things I was thinking of was like
in terms of even just for example I was watching a documentary on
Einstein and it was a situation where like he ran into
mathematics problems and so it was
a situation where like there was a race between him and another mathematician
who was older than he was and you know and he's trying to
figure things out you know and a lot of
situations where I think you know where you know yeah
like physics and science and psychology and all these other things
I teach a
course and I was just talking with this gentleman on the fact that Carl Jung
for example knew a lot and consulted with people outside
of his field you know to answer a lot of different questions and even as
myself as an English teacher
I often bring up things in terms of
science and all these other things that I'm learning about and constantly trying to say
that I mean in terms of that understanding of like convergence
I think that would be necessary for understanding
the underlying sort of intelligence
that there is to creation and then the second thing is
going back to
what you guys were initially talking about in terms of the fact that
you know the dynamic is always
changing that you know and going
to your question which is
you know don't we isn't there always a situation
where we don't know you know like I think as some
I was reading something when they were saying at the edge of the chaos in the world
is always creation right so isn't there always a situation
where and if we if we're ever
if we were ever to say this is God then wouldn't that be the end of
the morning okay so that's your question okay
you can ask
the time is it
your view of it is in fact
in the right direction the first of all the design is basically a movie
not a sketch in a zoology book
okay that's the first thing the second
there is no end to evolution the speaks of the
of the you call it the edge of chaos
I don't use the word chaos because it means
I don't know anything meaning I give up it's like turbulence
so but anyway there is that's the good news that
there is always a flow architecture
in the future that will be serving us better
and what you call it is really
not only up to you but depends on your upbringing
some of us have
have gotten both the religion and science others have gotten only the first
others have only gotten the second but
but every single one of us has the urge to to to to live
I'm talking about including my cat the urge to to live more easily
or save for longer and
all the rest again but your question question was
if there's a god should we just stop questioning anything
is that what you were enjoying the fun experience of
living under Trump yeah
yeah no but I think it's not about I mean I guess
right it's gonna mean right depends right if if if you don't believe in God
right then you're gonna keep questioning and if you do believe in God you have a choice
right and historically many people who believe in God were
also scientists and kept questioning the world around them and unveiling
the majesty of whatever I mean it's just different motivation
you know someone like me is not motivated that way and even if you told me
there is a god I go nah nah not really nah
I'm just not gonna go there
and every year is like what do I believe in
I'd say I believe in the Lord. I feel that's an excellent answer
I think that's an excellent answer. One last comment
I was just gonna say I think in that's really like some
theory, a theory or anything and those who want to talk about
the quantum creation of reality end up needing
to hypothesize like the mathematics of quantum mechanics that is
not instantiated anywhere it's just mathematics and that somehow
something that mathematics has given
being so I'm just trying to clarify I think that was your and if you got
to that final theory whether it's a personal god or not
with questioning
well you might not be searching for the ultimate explanation anymore but there
would be a lot of other things to explore.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Yeah.
Thank you.
