I'm Ed Nersesian Director of the Helix Center and I want to welcome you to today's program
on Elizabeth Bishop that was organized by the Chair of our Poetry Program, David Paulins,
who will introduce the participants.
Just to tell you the programs we have planned, on April 13th we have a program on Music,
Emotion and Mind.
On April 27th the program is on Curiosity and Ignorance and I think it's May 10th or
something like that.
We have a program, what's that one?
No, it's not on memory.
Should be on memory.
Oh, it's a program on a subject.
We all need to learn more about which is synthetic and systemic biology.
Thank you.
Well, welcome everybody to our talk today about Elizabeth Bishop.
We have a fabulous group of poets and scholars and editors all deeply connected to the work
of Elizabeth Bishop.
I'll introduce them.
Bonnie Castello is a professor at Boston University.
She's here on my right.
She's the author of Marian Moore Imaginary Possessions, Elizabeth Bishop Questions of
Mastery and the general editor of the selected Letters of Marian Moore.
Her more recent literary studies include Shifting Ground and Planets on Tables.
Ms. Castello is currently working on pronoun trouble, Auden and others in the first person
plural.
Alice Quinn is the executive director of the Poetry Society of America and an adjunct
professor at the Graduate School of the Art at Columbia University.
She was the Poetry editor of the New Yorker for two decades and before that was an editor
at Alfred Knopf.
Ms. Quinn compiled the collection of Elizabeth Bishop's unpublished work in Edgar Allan Poe
and the Jukebox, Uncollected Poems, Drafts and Fragments, which appeared in 2006.
She's currently preparing a collection of Elizabeth Bishop's journals and notebooks.
Lloyd Schwartz is the Frederick S. Troy Professor of English at the University of Massachusetts
in Boston.
In addition to being a poet and literary critic, Mr. Schwartz is the classical music editor of
the Boston Phoenix and a regular commentator in NPR's Fresh Air.
In 1994 he received the Pulitzer Prize for Criticism for his writing on music.
He is co-editor of Elizabeth Bishop and her art, a collection of essays on the poet and
the Library of America's edition of her collected works, Elizabeth Bishop, Poems, Proves and
Letters.
His own poems have been included in the Best American Poetry and the Pushcart Prize, Anthologies.
Gene Valentine, sitting between Lloyd and Alice, her first book, Dream Barker and Other Poems,
won the Yale Younger Poets Prize in 1965.
Laura in the Mountain, New and Collected Poems, 1965, 2003, won the National Book Award in
2004.
And her most recent book, Break the Glass, was a finalist for the 2011 Pulitzer Prize.
Ms. Valentine has received grants and fellowships from the Rockefeller Foundation, the National
Endowment for the Arts and the Guggenheim Foundation.
She's been awarded the Shelley Memorial Award for the Poetry Society of America and the Wallace
Stevens Award by the American Academy of Poets.
She was the state poet of New York from 2008 to 2010.
So if people saw the announcement for today's event, they can see that attention was drawn
to Elizabeth Bishop's powers of observation, which has been noted by many of the people
who've read her poetry closely.
And I'm just going to make a couple of comments about that.
And I'll just quote some things that she has said in referring to her maternal grandmother,
she says, my grandmother had a glass eye, blue, almost like her other one.
And this made her especially vulnerable and precious to me.
My father was dead and my mother was away in a sanatorium.
Until I was teased out of it, I used to ask grandmother when I said goodbye to promise
me not to die before I came home.
And then about her paternal grandfather, she said, he was wall-eyed.
At least one eye turned the wrong way, which made him endlessly interesting to me.
And then in a letter to her from Robert Lowell, he says, no eye in the world has seen what
yours has.
And starting with that, I'll turn to our participants to respond.
If I could just add one little anecdote, Robert Lowell introduced Elizabeth Bishop, which she
was giving a reading at the Guggenheim Museum.
And he referred to her famous eye.
When she got on stage, she announced that the famous eye will now put on her glasses.
We were trying to think before downstairs where it was that we read Mary McCarthy, a
vassar classmates description of Bishop's eye as like a great magnifying glass.
And she said, of course, the forfeit would be that you'd have to look at everything with
that eye.
So I think she thought Bishop was a little touchy.
Well, I'll play sort of counterpoint to this just a bit, because I was drawn to Bishop as
a great describer.
I had been reading Mary Ann Moore for a long time, and Mary Ann Moore, as probably some
of you know, was kind of a mentor to Elizabeth Bishop.
And I have always loved description and poetry.
But I think one of the things that happened is that Bishop was such a great describer.
That people's highest tribute to her was her accuracy.
And they missed often how deeply intelligent her poems are, how much psychological resonance
they have.
When I teach Bishop, I love to pass around a New Yorker cartoon that Saul Steinberg did.
And it's of a man in the middle of a spiral.
And at the end of the spiral, he's got a pen in his hand.
And at the end of the spiral, there's a landscape.
But it spins back to him.
And that always made me think about Bishop, that to describe something is always to find
out something about yourself, to come back to the self in some new way that you can't
know about the self only by turning inward.
But it's this constant engagement with the sense or with the visual field, especially
in Bishop's case, I think, that enriches that knowledge.
And it can be self-forgetful, of course, loss of self through engagement with the visual
world.
But I think ultimately the knowledge of the self comes back.
And so I think often critics, there was a kind of not damning with faint praise, but
a lack of recognition of the profundity of her poetry, because there was so much attention
to its visual accuracy at first.
So it's just a little counterpoint maybe to...
And just to go back to what Alice was thinking about what Mary McCarthy said, it made me
think of this passage in Crusoe in England, which is, if you don't know, the poem to one
of Bishop's most ambitious and one of her longest poems.
And it's a poem in the voice of Robinson Crusoe.
It's also, it seems to me, one of her most autobiographical poems.
And there's this amazing moment, like I'm chilling moment, where Robinson Crusoe says,
and part of the autobiographical background is that Bishop lived in Brazil for many years,
almost 20 years.
You could call it an exile and you could call it a kind of salvation in some ways.
But he says, Crusoe says, I'd have nightmares of other islands stretching away from mine,
infinities of islands, islands spawning islands like frogs, eggs turning into polywads of islands,
knowing that I had to live on each and every one, eventually for ages registering their
flora, their fauna, their geography.
So that sense that the price of seeing everything so clearly is that you had to see everything
and there was no way of stopping.
I think Jean is going to read, you were thinking of reading North Haven, the poem to Robert
Lowell.
In Bishop's last notebook, her last formal notebook, there are other little notebooks
she carried around.
But she is up early in the morning in North Haven, sitting on the porch at about six o'clock.
And she's decided to take the wildflower guide and to write down the name of every flower
that she can see from the porch.
And it's about this many flowers, but it's preceded by her writing.
I want now that it's too late to learn the name of everything.
She really did have that delight.
Bonnie talked about critics praising Bishop's accuracy and not her depth.
And there's a wonderful passage in a draft that I think Alice discovered or found at
Vassar of some sort of lecture or article that Bishop was going to give and never finished
called writing poetry is impossible.
And she says in this, and I think this is the statement that we should all remember Bishop
making because it's a profoundly self-reflexive.
She talks about the qualities she admires in the poetry she likes most, our accuracy, spontaneity,
and mystery.
And what an amazing conglomeration of different and yet overlapping things.
And of course it's very funny about, I mean, she's sort of so famous for being accurate.
And yet we know those of us who have really studied her poems that she was perfectly capable
of making things up and was very nervous.
80 watt bulbs and things like that, right?
Yeah.
Has anybody ever seen an 80 watt light bulb?
Well, she, and in one of her really greatest poems in the waiting room, she talks about
this issue of the National Geographic which was the issue that came out on her seventh
birthday.
And she describes in detail all these things that are in that issue.
And they're not in that issue.
And that people have written articles about the half a dozen issues of the National Geographic
that came out the year of her seventh birthday where a lot of these things are there.
But they're not in the February 1918 issues.
But it's true to memory.
It's true to memory.
Memory does that too.
But yeah, except that she knew she was making this up and as Alice said, she was really
worried about New Yorker fact checkers.
And they did check.
And she said, right, right.
And I heard her tell me, what's the thing when you have time with the crew so it works?
And she said, I know.
Yes, right.
She has in that poem in the Crusoe in England, she has Robinson Crusoe trying to remember
a line that is a famous line by Wordsworth.
And the New Yorker fact checkers pointed out that Wordsworth came much later, you know,
the next century, or, you know, in the next century from Robinson Crusoe.
And she said, yeah, I know.
I love the tents of I shant and lied.
Even losing you, I shant and lied.
It's very bizarre.
Who says shant anyway?
But where is that?
Yeah, right.
Right.
Right.
She was thrown back, wasn't it?
Yeah, grandparents, do you think?
Yeah.
Well, I think that's the phrase safe as houses.
That's a very old-
Safe as houses.
My grandmother used to say safe as houses.
Yes.
Really?
Oh, yeah.
And your grandmother was from English?
English.
My English grandmother.
Oh, this was not the Canadian.
No, not the Canadian one, the English one.
One of the things that we were talking about, the temporality of the Crusoe poem, and when
we think about Bishop as a visual poet primarily, we not only want to remind ourselves of the
profundity of the accumulated meaning that's coming through detail rather than some imposition
of symbols into the poem.
But we also, I think, want to be aware that while she's a great describer, she also has
a sense of time in motion, and often her landscapes will be surprisingly, they'll be
like time lapses.
You can feel spring happening as she's describing a hill.
We're often in this kind of space that's half time and half space that is the space
of the mind, partly.
And there are many poems that do that.
And it's a little unsettling at times because you get disoriented in what is the
sequence.
The standard here, you know, or the measure, but she's so interested in that, the psychology
of space.
But maybe disoriented is okay.
Bigger party?
Maybe disoriented is okay.
Well, it's a place of discovery, certainly, right?
Yeah, and I'm thinking of that distorted and revealed.
Drowning passage, you know.
Yeah.
Does somebody have that to read?
I do have it to read.
Yeah.
I didn't mean to.
No, no, please.
I think it's from a letter to Anne Stevenson who wrote the first book on Bishop and sent
her lots of questions in Brazil.
And Bishop sent her back a very significant, manifestly important letter about seven pages
long, and this is a passage.
Oh, this is a bit long, but I think it's worth it.
It's not terribly long.
There's the gap between the observed world and the unknown, the psychic one, is something
that disturbs Bishop and her early work, and something that only long experience helped
her to overcome.
30 years later, she's able to speak as if there were no conflict.
There is no split.
This is Bishop.
Dreams, works of art, some, glimpses of moments of empathy, is it?
Catch a peripheral vision of whatever it is one can never really see full face, but that
seems enormously important.
I can't believe we are wholly irrational, and I do admire Darwin, but reading Darwin
one admires the beautiful, solid case being built up of his endless, heroic observations.
I tell us a hust.
Almost unconscious or automatic, and then comes a sudden relaxation, a forgetful phrase, and
one feels the strangeness of his undertaking, sees the lonely young man, his eyes fixed
on facts and minute details, sinking or sliding giddily off into the unknown.
What one seems to want in art, she goes on, in experiencing it, is the same thing that
is necessary for its creation, a self-forgetful, perfectly useless concentration.
It's good in it.
But when you said disorienting, I thought of them.
You know, one of the things I love about that passage that you reinforced in the way you
really performed it for us is how she's always in the moment when she's writing, so that
there are all these interjections, the parentheses, the questioning of what she's just asserted.
There are so many ways that Bishop achieves that in poetry, sometimes by using a word
like here, where you just become very present in whatever the thought process is.
I think even there, when she's answering the question from a literary critic, you feel
her kind of thinking it through anew.
So it's very exciting.
It's like her poems in that way.
You remind me of another really famously great passage in Bishop, the end of, at the
fish houses.
She's visiting in Nova Scotia, and she has this kind of epiphany at the end of the poem
where she's dipping her hand in the cold Atlantic, and it's as if the water were a
transmutation of fire.
And then this is the conclusion of the poem.
It is like what we imagine knowledge to be, dark, salt, clear, moving, utterly free, drawn
from the cold, hard mouth of the world, derived from the rocky breasts forever, flowing and
drawn, and since our knowledge is historical, flowing and flown, which is really kind of
playing with grammar, flown is not the past tense of flowing, but it's everything is
moving.
Nothing is static.
Her poems have that quality, and it's kind of a quality, and I think it's one of her
great qualities, one of the great qualities in her poems, is that she is living through
them.
It's not just something, and as you said before, and you've written wonderfully about her questioning
in poems, that nothing is fixed.
And life is something we experience as something constantly changing and never simple.
And I think there's an embrace of that, so that the skepticism is not a negative skepticism.
Modernism skepticism can be very negative, and hers is an interrogative mode of skepticism,
more than a negative harsh rupture.
And as you've said also, I think it's a way of bringing herself home.
It's a way of finding out.
Right, questions are ways of coming in.
I love that.
You know, Franny Blau, her friend, quoted, and I think it was the oral biography, she
said it was later in life that Bishop said to her, I think we're all, I think the world
is a mess, and we're all sub primitive, but we have to be gay in spite of it.
You know that passage in the poem, Lloyd, it is like what we imagine knowledge to be
is embedded in her notebooks from the trip that she took to Nova Scotia to Raggedy Island
in that place.
Her publisher was pursuing her with the copies of her first book, and she escaped to Nova
Scotia.
And she always made it very hard for her own middle of the middle of the net, or to do
anything right.
And so anyhow, she passed on the ferry, the sanatorium, where her mother had been incarcerated
from the time she was five until she graduated from Vassar.
And in the notebooks, she writes, I passed the sanatorium where mother was, I hadn't
prepared for this, which really seems amazing when you read it.
I mean, that's the way you get to that place.
And then following that, almost immediately she writes, it is like what we imagine knowledge
to be.
So I think it has a kind of tragic undertone, or overtone for her.
And that same trip in the notebook, she has, the millions of grains are black, white, tan,
and rose mixed with quartz grains.
Rose and amethyst from her own, her self-portrait poem, sandpiper, which is such a great.
Yeah.
I think some of that power of observation that we've been commenting on has to do probably
with a vigilance.
So perhaps we think she ought to have anticipated passing the sanatorium on the way to the island,
but she wasn't conscious of it.
She wasn't thinking about it.
And yet some part of her mind was probably prepared, and yet also shocked by that experience
the passing bond.
You know, that gives me a chance to quote something that I found so fascinating.
These are all from, these are little quotes from an early notebook that starts in Cuddy
Hunk, which is where Godnelled account says Shakespeare set the tempest in Cuddy Hunk,
this little island off of New Bedford.
And she went there with her friend, the only man in her life other than her friend Tom
Waining, Bob Seaver, who was the brother of a friend, Barbara Chesney, I think, from
Vassar.
And he loved her and gave her his fraternity pin.
And he wanted to marry her.
And he killed himself.
And she got a postcard three days after he died saying, go to hell, Elizabeth.
I mean, it was one of her early, really horrible tragedies.
But she quotes him.
And you can see how much she loved other people's observation.
And this again goes back to Sandpiper.
Bob said at Nantucket once the water where the waves come in on a coarse rolling gravel
that it sounded like fat sputtering in a pan.
The water behind Mrs. Crane's house coming in and short sliding waves on sand, he said
sounded like someone's shoveling snow.
Well, this turns up in Sandpiper.
This is 1934, 1962, little Sandpiper running along.
The beach hisses like fat on his left and interrupted, a sheet of interrupting water.
I mean, these images, she really thought in images.
And they stayed with her forever.
And the entries about New York City in the Depression years are fantastic.
And here's one that makes me think of the pacing that you talked about.
Remember the little essay that she wrote about?
The geese flying over his invasser.
And you know the musical drama.
Some of them are hanging back a little.
It's like a rubato in music.
And then she describes the whole migration as kind of having an invisible net around it.
And that always seems to me the kind of rhyme, the kind of dappled rhyme and the pacing that
she's after in her poems.
But this I think is fascinating.
The other day, and speaks to what you said, before I realized it.
The other day before I realized it, I saw a man winding a barber pole.
The iron poles in the city must be electric.
But this one wasn't.
A large keyhole just below the stripe section, and he wound it, sounded like a clock.
The pole was striking up slowly.
The stripes mounting with effort gradually faster and faster.
Fantastic.
So we come back to the power of her accurate eye.
I mean there's no questioning of that.
I mean it's absolutely there.
But in the pacing, the way she's written it, she gives you how she took it in.
I just love that.
There's a little moment in one of the letters that she's writing to Anne Stevenson.
Bishop was so kind of famously reticent about her personal life.
But here was this young American poet living in England, writing a book about her and asking
her all sorts of questions, and she actually responds to these questions, and she kind
of provides, and it's really great information for all of us who are interested in her, she
provides so much personal detail.
But there is this one absolutely chilling moment in this letter to Anne Stevenson.
She gets to 1934.
And this is her whole comment about 1934.
Met MM, Marianne Moore.
Met MM, Mother Died, Graduated.
That's like that on the front of her notebook from the year she was consultant to the Library
of Congress, Poetry Consultant, on the front of the notebook.
It says 1950, just about my worst comma so far.
Well, maybe this is a good moment.
I don't know if we have time to read a poem or something.
The poem that I had thought I might read to the group today is a poem called The Bite.
Since we're talking about Bishop's diary entries and so on, The Bite is a, I think, a relevant
poem.
It's about, a bite, B-I-G-H-T is a kind of landscape structure in Florida.
The Key West Bite is a kind of enclosing of water.
It's kind of like a bay.
It's a little small enclosure.
But of course it's also upon the bite.
But right underneath the tile of the poem, The Bite, we have rather uncharacteristically,
I think, on my birthday.
And it's a descriptive poem.
There's nothing about her birthday in the rest of the poem.
But anyone who knows Bishop will know that she wrote a letter to Robert Lowell while she
was in Key West and said the water at the Key West Bite looks like blue glass, sorry,
blue gas.
G-A-S-S, the water at the bite looks like blue gas.
The harbor is always a mess here.
Junkie little boats all piled up, some hung with sponges and always a few half sunk or
splintered up from the most recent hurricane.
It reminds me a little of my desk.
So you have to keep that in mind as you listen to this descriptive poem of The Bite.
And there's so many things I love about this poem, certainly the way that this kind of scanning
of the surface of the scene leads to this more inward kind of reflection eventually.
I love that about it.
But I also love just, as Alice suggested, Bishop loved names of things.
She was quite the fisherman.
And so she loved nautical vocabulary.
So there are great words like Jack's straw gaffes and things that if you're not a boat
person, you have to go and look up.
So there's that marvelous sense of vocabulary.
And it's also a marvelous poem because it is, on the one hand, frightening in places, close
to even suicidal kinds of imagery.
But it's also very funny.
And so there's this pulling back from something that's quite dark.
There is this vividness of the scene.
At the same time, there's a kind of dreamlike quality to the poem.
So I'll just read it.
At low tide, like this, how sheer the water is.
White crumbling ribs of moral, protrude and glare.
When the boats are dry, the pilings dry as matches, absorbing rather than being absorbed,
the water in the bite doesn't wet anything.
The color of the gas flame turned as low as possible.
One can smell it turning to gas.
So we could be in a Sylvia Plath poem at this point, right?
If one were boat layer, one would probably hear it turning to marimba music.
So there's a swerve, right?
The little ochre dredge at work off the end of the dock already plays the dry, perfectly
offbeat claves.
The birds are outsized.
And here comes the comic part and I think self-parodic.
Pelican's crash into this peculiar gas unnecessarily hard, it seems to me, like pickaxes rarely
coming up with anything to show for it and going off with enormous elbowings.
Black and white manor warbirds soar on impalpable drafts and open their tails like scissors
on the curves or tents or sorry, unpalpable drafts and open their tails like scissors
on the curves or tents them like wishbones till they tremble.
With frowsy sponge boats keep coming in with the obliging air of retrievers, bristling
with jack straw gaffs and hooks and decorated with bobbles of sponges.
There is a fence of chicken wire along the dock where glinting like little plowshares,
the blue gray shark tails are hung up to dry for the Chinese restaurant trade.
Some of the little white boats are still piled up against each other or lie on their sides,
stove in and not yet salvaged if they ever will be from the last bad storm, like torn
open unanswered letters.
The bite is littered with old correspondences.
Quick click goes the dredge and brings up a dripping jaw full of moral and all the untidy
activity continues, awful but cheerful.
And I love Bishop's gift for bringing important information into a poem through simile, the
unobtrusive mode that allows the world to be the world while the poet introduces her
own thoughts, so the crucial information here of the unopened letters torn open unanswered
letters and the allusions there to correspondences not only interpersonal but she was a great
reader at this time of the poet Baudelaire who had a poem called correspondance and so
she's introducing a conversation with Baudelaire about the nature of the symbol but in this
most subtle and delicate way.
The last line by the way and I maybe one of my colleagues here can tell the story of
how this happened but the last line all the untidy activity continues, awful but cheerful
is engraved in her tombstone.
So it continues.
I just wanted to say that in rereading her poems for today one of the things that impressed
me the most was the incredibly remarkable balance of tension between words that we could call
happy and words that we could call scary or grim.
Yes.
And this is an excellent example of it, it's usually done in imagery, in descriptors but
here the last line awful and cheerful brings it up almost to a level of abstraction.
Exactly.
That tension that is always there in the poems.
Right.
Right.
I know when we were talking about her, we brought up her love of naming things.
I really feel that was imprinted early on with her love of Hopkins, pride beauty and all
trades, their gear and tackling trends.
Yes.
And the sounds.
The sounds.
This poem is just full of fabulous sounds, the mix of the angles.
I mean the word the bite itself has that kind of wonderful angle of Saxon for those of
these.
I was going to say, am I interrupting?
I was going to say that we talk about her eyes so much and everyone does but her ears
and that's all that.
She really is living in sound the whole time I think.
Yeah.
And in this poem, Sound and Sight Slipped Together we have that synesthesia where the
blue gas turns to her inbox.
That's right.
That's wonderful.
Yeah.
Yeah.
By the way, Lloyd has reprinted in the Library of America edition the entire correspondence
with Anne Stevenson, which is really like a primer for her.
Yeah.
It's just one of the few places where she is actually talking about her life.
And even in the extraordinary correspondence with Robert Lowell, that 700 page correspondence
that reads like a Victorian novel, it's so gripping, but she doesn't really talk very
much about her personal history, her background.
And they're really talking about more immediate things, absolutely riveting and heartbreaking.
But it is that one place where I think she was really, she was concerned enough to have
that after being, you know, she'd won some prizes and she was being published in the
New Yorker, you know, she had a career, but she was also living in Brazil.
And I think this was, she was just vulnerable enough to be willing to answer Anne Stevenson's
questions.
Yeah.
And also she said, you know, she sometimes wrote as many as 40 letters a day.
And she described that as sort of working without really working.
Let me just say, you know, for people who may not know the biographical data, Elizabeth
Bishop had the most dramatically tragic early childhood.
Her father died when she was eight months old.
Her mother, I don't know what the story is there about her mother's mental illness, but
she was hospitalized and institutionalized when Elizabeth herself was five, correct?
And then she went to live with grandparents.
And I think there was some shuffling back and forth between the sets of grandparents.
Was there a custody battle also?
No.
But the parents, on the father's side, they...
They eventually understood that it was, she got asthma there.
She said that she felt about on the same level as the dog, that, that, that, that, that,
you know.
Well, she was living with her maternal grandparents in Nova Scotia, in a small town in Nova Scotia.
And really enjoying herself as a kid.
And her maternal grandparents were not at all wealthy.
I mean, just maybe barely lower middle class.
It was a towner.
Yeah.
And working family and living in this little cottage in a small town in Nova Scotia.
Bishops' fathers' family were wealthy people from Worcester.
Bishops' paternal grandfather owned a construction company who built, you know, the Boston Public
Library, Symphony Hall.
I mean, they were really major, not architects, but builders.
And the grandparents felt that, you know, their granddaughter living in this kind of
practically on a farm, running around the streets of Great Village, the ironic time of
the city, Great Village.
Running around barefoot and bringing cows out into the meadow and playing tricks, this
was not what their granddaughter ought to be brought up to be.
And they essentially, they didn't exactly abduct her, but they came, it was an agreement,
and they brought Elizabeth to Worcester where she was absolutely miserable.
And as Alice said, develop asthma, develop eczema that never, the as she almost died of
asthma a number of times over her whole life, the eczema never was completely cured, it was
always recurring.
And finally, the grandparents kind of had to admit that they had really made a mistake
and kind of farmed Elizabeth out to her and her mother's sister who was living in Revere,
Massachusetts, one of the suburbs.
And then they paid for, she went to the Walnut Hill School and then to Vassar, so they certainly
paid for absolutely first grade education, but at a great cost to Bishop.
And she was so sick when she first got there they had to carry her up the stairs.
And she didn't go to school until she was 15 or something like that.
And that's her aunt got her long fellow in Wordsworth and Blake and Hopkins and she entered
those poems.
And one little detail about her mother being institutionalized was that Elizabeth was not
allowed to ever visit her mother.
And you know, they thought this was what psychiatry was in 1918, that it would be too
upsetting to Elizabeth's mother to see her daughter.
So she was absolutely forbidden to see her.
So once her mother was taken away and institutionalized, Bishop never saw her again.
So that met M.M.
Well suddenly she has this new sort of surrogate mother in Marion Moore, met M.M.
Mother died, graduated.
You know that that, we'll be awfully careful again.
Exactly.
And for those in the audience who are not terribly familiar with Bishop Therese, beautiful poems
in which she explores her childhood, very famously the poem Sestina, the poem in the
waiting room.
She's a great poet of childhood and memory.
She's also a great poet of travel and landscape and sometimes those things to come together.
But I think this terrible, terrible suffering, not that it's a consolation, but for us as
a gift that she was able to transform it into something very beautiful.
Some of the best poems of Bishop I think are about childhood and memory.
I wanted to read a poem also, but that goes a little later.
I mean this isn't a childhood poem, but it's a poem about Brazil.
And Brazil, she never intended to stay in Brazil.
But on her first visit she got very sick.
She was going to travel around Cape Horn on a Norwegian freighter.
She got as far as Brazil and she was visiting, the boat was docking for a couple of weeks.
And she was going to visit these two acquaintances of hers, whom she'd met in New York, a Brazilian
woman and her American partner.
And she, and this was connected to the asthma and the eczema, she ate a piece of cashew fruit,
the nuts, or cashew nuts are in, and had a violent allergic reaction and a phylactic
shock and had to be hospitalized.
And she blew up, she couldn't breathe, her throat was constricted.
She missed the boat.
And fell in love with the Brazilian woman.
And the Brazilian woman, de Maseto Saguares, came from an aristocratic family, had some
money, said stay, I'll build you a studio, and come to my home, recuperate in this magnificent
home in the mountains.
And that was, it really kind of saved her life right after she had that miserable year
as consultant in poetry to the Library of Congress, the old name for Poet Laureate.
And she really, for many years, she had a really great life in Brazil.
And then things, for various complicated reasons, including political and the commitments of
water to public works, and she was building a park in Rio, it's the most beautiful park
in Rio now, but it essentially, it killed her.
And the relationship began to deteriorate and Bishop left Brazil, and sort of tragic
story.
Are you going to read a rifle?
I'm going to read Pink Dawn.
Oh, oh, good.
And she has a poem that she started on the verge of leaving Brazil.
I think the original title of this poem was Farewell to Rio.
And then she changed the title to Pink Dog.
It took her 20 years to finish it, and it was actually, it wasn't the last poem she
started.
I hope Jean is going to read the last poem she started.
But it's the last poem she finished.
It was actually the last poem that she succeeded in finishing.
And it just, I wanted to read it because it says some, it's such a wonderful example
of the things that Bonnie was talking about before, the images of the city, and then the
awful but cheerful in a kind of extreme because there's a really bitter joke in the poem.
And then the sound effects, where she is actually imitating the sound of a samba.
And I think it's my theory that this is her parody of the girl from Ipanema.
And really you can almost, you can almost sing this to the music of the girl from Ipanema.
When did that song get published?
Well that was in the 60s, and it was written by a close friend of hers, Venetia's Demariah,
she was a very famous poet and actor.
She translated him.
Ladies man, she translated him.
We have to say her translation of Venetia's sonnet of intimacy, Bishop was so proud of
it.
You know, people have this image of her as this very prim, you know, misbishop, people
called her misbishop.
That translation had the word, ended with the word piss.
And it was the first time a four-letter word had ever appeared in a poem in the New Yorker.
And Bishop was so proud of it.
I mean she really bragged about it.
But let me read this poem.
I think it's one of her most amazing poems, Pink Dog, Rio de Janeiro.
And remember, the girl from Ipanema begins with this beautiful Brazilian woman and a
bikini crossing the Avanita Atlantica to go to the beach, Pink Dog.
The sun is blazing and the sky is blue.
Umbrellas clothe the beach in every hue, naked, you trot across the avenue.
Oh, never have I seen a dog so bare, naked and pink without a single hair, startled the
passers-by, draw back and stare.
Of course, they're mortally afraid of rabies.
You are not mad.
You have a case of scabies.
But look intelligent.
Where are your babies?
A nursing mother by those hanging teats.
In what slum have you hidden them poor bitch while you go begging, living by your wits?
Didn't you know it's been in all the papers to solve this problem, how they deal with
beggars?
They take and throw them in the tidal rivers.
Yes, idiots, paralytics, parasites go bobbing in the ebbing sewage nights out in the suburbs
where there are no lights.
If they do this to anyone who begs, drugged, drunk or sober with or without legs, what
would they do to sick four-legged dogs?
In the cafes and on the sidewalk corners, the joke is going round that all the beggars
who can afford them now wear life preservers.
In your condition, you would not be able even to float much less to dog paddle.
Now look, the practical, the sensible solution is to wear a phantazia.
Tonight you simply can't afford to be a nysore, but no one will ever see a dog in
mascara this time of year.
Ash Wednesday will come, but carnival is here.
What sombas can you dance?
What will you wear?
They say that carnivals degenerate, radios, Americans, or something have ruined it completely.
They are just talking.
Carnival is always wonderful.
A depolated dog would not look well.
Dress up.
Dress up and dance at carnival.
She actually breaks the line in the middle of the word an, a-n.
You simply can't afford to be a nysore.
The n is on the beginning of the next line.
Glens.
Yeah, glens.
Right.
That s a, should we read song for the rainy season?
Oh, yes.
Which kind of describes almost in anticipation of the end of the paradisical time in Brazil.
That s a poem I wish were a lot better known.
I forget.
Oh, God.
She talked about pacing by the little spring by their home, and the maid would be, she
said, what must she think of me as I go back repeating phrases over and over?
And I can t help thinking, how did she feel when she came up with hidden, oh, hidden in
the high fog, the house we live in?
Song for the rainy season, hidden, oh, hidden in the high fog, the house we live in beneath
the magnetic rock.
Rain, rainbow ridden, where blood black, bromelias, lichens, owls, and the lint of the waterfalls
cling, familiar, unbidden.
In a dim age of water, the brook sings loud for a rib cage of giant fern.
Vapor climbs up the thick growth effortlessly, turns back, holding them both house and rock
in a private cloud.
At night on the roof, blind drops crawl, and the ordinary brown owl gives us proof he can
count.
Five times, always five, he stamps and takes off after the fat frogs that shilling for
love, clamor, and mount.
House open house to the white dew and the milk white sunrise kind to the eyes.
To membership of silverfish, mouse, bookworms, big moths, with a wall for the mildew's ignorant
map.
Marked and tarnished by the warm touch of the warm breath, maculate cherished, rejoice,
for a later era will differ, a difference that kills or intimidates, much of all our
small, shadowy life.
Without water, the great rock will stare un-magnetized, there, no longer wearing rainbows or rain,
the forgiving air and the high fog gone, the owls will move on, and the several waterfalls
shrivel in the steady sun.
She saw it coming.
I mean, it's that wonderful description of how, of just this open, how, this is a modern
house with glass walls, and you know, it was just, you almost couldn't tell where the house
ended and the, you know, rainforest.
Yeah, actually, I have that wonderful description in a letter saying it's all part of the really
lofty vagueness of Brazil, where a cloud is entering my living room right this minute.
Right.
One of the things that that poem brings out, and actually all the poems we've read bring
out, it brings out, is how often her poems engage animal life.
And I mean, in the case of pink dog in a most sort of parable way, I mean, pink dog is
it.
She's really identifying.
Of course, yeah, pink dog is sort of an allegorical figure there, but there's a continuum, I think,
and all the animals in Bishop are both, they're, they're, they're figures from a kind of the
unconscious life of the world, but they're also surrogates for the poet, her way into,
to get closer to that unconscious life of the world.
And so she's a great poet of animals and encounters with animals in a way very different
from other poets, Marianne Moore, for instance, where there is much more the sense of writing
fables in the ASOP tradition, or else scientific tracks even, you know, which feature articles
on animals.
Bishop's animals have this, this wonderful otherness and yet communication with the human world
or, or resonance with the human world and the owls and so on in that scene, I think, bring
that out really, really well.
Yeah, I actually love the number five.
Five.
Which reminds me, just back to that thing about her vision and what a curse as well as
what a blessing is, in a, in a, in a prose poem called rainy season sub-tropics, there's
a section called giant toad, which begins, I will close at the near the beginning, my
eyes bulge and hurt, they are my one great beauty, even so, they see too much above below
and yet there is not much to see.
Yeah.
Those are extraordinary.
I love those.
Oh, Jean.
Well, I would just think, I don't know if this is obvious, but I just say it in case
it isn't.
But it seems to me that the eye, the everything she saw all around her, probably from when
she was born, was a way of connecting and locating herself in the world.
And I think her rhymes were like that too.
I was thinking before we came today that I don't really have anything to say about her
rhymes except that.
But it seemed to me they were comforting to her as they are to us as readers.
Rhyme always is, I think.
It's either very emphatic only or comforting.
But she has, I was first reading her when I was very young, luckily, had her north and
south and a cold spring in my raincoat pocket when I was in college because somebody told
me we'd miss Bishop.
We called everybody that then.
I mean, all the women miss more.
It was ridiculous.
But anyway, I did have that book and I would be so struck by her rhymes because I wasn't
sure, since 1956, if you should rhyme or not.
Anyway, nobody could tell you.
But she was rhyming almost it seemed without effort.
And I guess that's how all great poets do.
But in a wonderful field, I'm back to you.
In a wonderfully fluid way, I think of the fantastic use of rhyme in something like the
moose where it's not a rhyme scheme.
But often she's rhyming words of nature and human world words, so, you know, birches and
churches.
So that there's this beautiful integration that can happen in the place of rhyme.
And it's a master and disaster.
Yes, she stole that one from W.H.
Auden.
But you know, when you say that, it reminded me of something.
Now I can't think what.
Oh, I know what it was.
But I have a friend who's very, very good at writing a form of our Joan Larkin.
And she has said that, and this probably gave me the idea of this thing of seeing and hearing,
too.
And Joan said she does a crown of solace about some painful subject.
But she said it's like a handhold through the pain for her to have the rhyme scheme,
very tight rhyme scheme in that case.
But I think by the time of the moose, she probably didn't even have to think about it.
Oh, no.
You know, it was so probably in her body, but I'm sure she did think about it.
But you know, she said to a friend of mine, I'm going to stop there a minute, but she
said to a friend of mine, Eleanor Ross Taylor, a very wonderful poet that you know, Alice.
I mean, excuse me, Elizabeth had just done reading.
And so Eleanor poet, too, came up to her and said, I just love that poem, the moose.
It's just, I don't, it's just a miraculous poem, because we all feel that.
But Elizabeth, I think this characteristic from what I know, said, it's just what happened.
You know, and that's a very telling thing as well as a sort of fun anecdote, I think,
of her modesty.
But I think, I think she liked what happened, as well as, of course, the pain.
But I think it gave her her life.
Yeah.
I do think so.
I thought you had a five day to cap a poem and she heard somebody saying afterwards, not
bad for a poem.
For a poem.
Also, it was introduced by a provost, or whoever was in charge of that reading, as Elizabeth
Bishop will now read her new poem, The Moose.
The Moose.
She got a lot of mileage out of that, too.
But I was thinking, hearing you talk about, about, because I'm hoping you will read Sonnet.
Because the rhymes are so intricate and they're often, not all the rhymes are at the ends
of the words, but they're kind of buried in the middle of, in the ends of lines, but buried
in the middle of lines.
And there's so much play, if I think if you just heard the poem, you couldn't actually
tell where the lines were supposed to end because they're so playful and tricky and
marvelous.
I think that's so beautiful and I think that's how she got to be.
You don't, I mean, you know her.
So, that feels to me like she just did it all her life and that's how she got to be
there, do you think?
Yeah.
Yeah.
But she just, I don't know, Sonnet.
Well, I'll read it.
Caught the bubble in the spirit level, a creature divided and the compass needle wobbling and
wavering undecided.
Freed the broken, the mama, there's mercury running away and the rainbow bird from the
narrow bevel of the empty mirror flying wherever it feels like gay.
That was the poem that ran in the New Yorker after Bishop died and there was some conversation
between Alice, Beth, Fessel and Howard because Bishop had corrected that poem by phone and
the manuscript as it was in Galilee in the New Yorker said, caught the bubble in the
spirit level, contrarily guided, not a creature divided and then she changed it.
But Howard had to testify to that really.
That's a good change.
And mirrors were very important to Bishop and in her early notebook she had this wonderful
entry, age 23.
A woman sat, let me see, her wicked mirror took her face, crumpled it quickly and flung
it back.
And she loved inversions.
Yeah.
I mean, we were talking about rhyme and of course, as you well know, Sonnet is an upside
dance on it.
It's not only a very narrow Sonnet, maybe instead of the full I am in cantameter, but
it's not eight and six in the traditional Sonnet form, but it's upside down, six and
eight.
So she's playing with inversion in all kinds of ways and yet it never feels contrived.
I think that's what you were saying about that kind of, it just seems to emerge.
Just seems to have to.
Isn't there an image in one of the poems that takes place in Brazil in which the person
has to find a mirror that's never been looked into?
Yes, that's a river man.
Oh, the river man.
That's right.
Yeah, that's right.
It imagines herself as a shaman type figure.
Yes.
There's also a poem called, an earlier poem called Insomnia about the moon in the bureau
mirror and looking into the mirror as a world inverted, even the phrase is inverted.
Their day is always night and forget what the list of thing is and the last line in this
inverted world is, and you love me.
Those were the only poems that she sort of openly said, it's about a love affair, about
a failed love affair, the beautiful poem conversation, until a name and all its connotation mean
the same.
She's so beautiful.
Well, I'd kind of like to recite sandpiper, her self-portrait thinking about all of her
travels and that fat pan, that fat sputtering in the pan.
So the only reference I think is to Blake to see the world in a grain of sand and eternity
in an hour.
So sandpiper, the roaring alongside he takes for granted and that every so often the world
is bound to shake.
He runs, he runs to the south, finical, awkward, in a state of controlled panic, a student of
Blake.
The beach, this is like fat on his left, an interrupting sheet of water, a sheet of interrupting
water, comes and goes and glazes over his dark and brittle feet.
He runs, he runs straight through it, watching his toes.
Watching rather the spaces of sand between them wear no detail too small, the Atlantic
drains backwards and downwards.
As he runs, he stares at the dragging grains.
The world is a mist and then the world is minute and fast and clear.
The tide is higher or lower, he couldn't tell you which his beak is focused, he is preoccupied.
Looking for something, something, something poor bird, he is obsessed.
The millions of grains are black, white, tan and brown mixed with quartz grains, rose
and amethyst, gray, not brown, black, white, tan and gray mixed with quartz.
I love that poem so much.
Speak is focused, he is preoccupied.
Thank you.
Ellie Carter, the late Elliot Carter, who recently died almost 104, still writing, wrote a song
cycle based on Elizabeth Bishop Holmes and Sandpiper is in that cycle.
He knew that that was an autobiographical poem.
The sandpiper in his setting is played by an oboe, which was Carter's own instrument.
He was mirroring her autobiography and searching for something, something, something.
The world is minute and vast, both, which seems very Bishop.
The shift in scale that we're always talking about.
It's so vibrant when a poet does that.
She didn't like the setting.
She didn't like Carter's setting.
She didn't get it.
The other thing about the sandpiper and insomnia and many of her poems is that she had this
conversation with the tradition of poetry.
She was deeply read but not at all showy about her reading, not a poet that requires footnotes.
She didn't like footnotes.
But there are conversations going on with poetry of the past, not for the purpose of
displaying her edition or a particular narrow kind of mastery, but just because the conversation,
one of the things poetry is for is to conduct a conversation over time.
And insomnia has a conversation with Philip Sidney's famous poem, Addressed to the Moon.
And of course Blake's Auguries of Innocence in the sandpiper.
She quotes a Herbert line in waiting at Wellfleet, although she doesn't say who she's quoting.
And it doesn't matter if you don't know.
The poem is complete by itself, about that knowledge, but there's this layer that is
pleasing to those of us who do know the poems of the past.
And it just reminds us that poetry exists in those two dimensions of the contemporaneity
and the long vertical feeling of the tradition.
Speaking of Herbert, do you all know the Herbert dream she had?
You all do.
She dreamed that Herbert appeared to her in her dream and with his curls and his scarlet
shirt, I'll say.
And he said to her, I can help you.
Isn't that nice?
That is a Patrick Priest.
I wish I'd get one like that.
But I do believe he did.
He really did.
After a lot of time, she carried Herbert with her.
In camp when she was a little girl.
I think she did.
Talking about George Herbert, the 17th century poet, I think I didn't say that.
It reminds me too that something that we haven't mentioned, I don't think, but which appears
also in many of her poems, sort of not too obviously, is the architecture of the church.
Or maybe a person at the church.
She doesn't make a big point about it, but when she's describing her landscapes, there's
a spire.
Right.
She's qualifying whether it's a church.
Her cage like the Jesuit church.
No, no.
Yes, she does.
Do you know that house?
Oh, excuse me.
No, go ahead.
No, go ahead.
The house in Great Village in Nova Scotia is right next to the church.
And she had an amazing, which was quite a high spire for Great Village.
And she had an amazing thing that she says, somewhere, and I don't remember where.
If you touched it, this is after her mother had had the scream, she wrote a beautiful story.
Wasn't it a story called the scream about the...
In the village.
In the village, it's called.
And yeah, the low poem was called the scream.
Anyway, it's about a moment of breakdown of her mother when she's being fitted for address.
And it's a beautiful, beautiful story if you get the chance to read it.
I think the first words in the story are the scream.
The scream, yeah.
And that's it.
Oh, okay.
Well, I think it's in there that she talks about the church steeple.
And if you put your finger on the church steeple, it would be the scream.
It's amazing.
Yeah, that is just the image.
It is the image.
It is like a tuning.
Like a...
Yeah.
It's the scream.
But when you mentioned the church, she was right next to that church for those years,
you know.
She has the Baptist hymns to the seal.
I mean, a lot of...
You can hear also, uh, some of her poetry has the cadence of Dickinson who got her cadences
from the hymns.
And you can see that carryover as well.
Yes.
Yeah.
But there is this sort of quiet compass, you know, where the church is being found in
the landscape in many poems, I think.
Yeah, it comes up that way.
Abivalently sometimes.
Of course.
She was in the calluses and I think she had her reservations and stuff.
Yeah, the gold and the Vatican made her session.
Yeah.
Oh, I think that...
I was looking through the early notebooks to see if I could share some things and...
I think that one of the things about Bishop's poems is that there's always...
She has a good sense of drama.
Oh, yes.
That's where the mystery comes in.
And there was this little tiny fragment.
Again, she's 24 years old here in New York, 1934.
When we walked across the bridge, the sun particularized certain windows off the river.
If you should go to such a place at such a time, burst in and say...
Mm.
Mm.
It's great.
And that's what she took from seeing the window.
That's the one...
Oh, my God.
These notebooks are great.
Did she ever try to write a play?
I mean, there's...
She read a lot of plays in the library.
There's a lot of dialogue in her poems, Bill Fins.
She was.
She did translate the birds.
Yeah, the masks.
That's right, of course.
Yes.
And Elizabeth and masks, she's driving in such a nice reading.
Yeah.
But she never tried to write a original play.
No.
She wrote everything else, I think.
Yes, didn't she?
And she loved, loved, loved witty people.
Whitt was very important to her.
And I think she said that Pauline Hemingway was the wittiest person that she had ever
known.
But she's in one of letters, or maybe to Anne Stevenson, I think.
She said, I've been lucky in my life.
I've known some very, very witty people.
And what's the line in one art, at the end of one art?
The jokey voice.
The jokey voice.
Oh, the gesture.
The gesture of one.
But the jokey voice.
Yeah, the jokey voice.
So important.
And that the two most serious relationships that she has in most serious is the wrong
word.
The two really biggest, deepest relationships that she had were with people who were very
witty and entertained a lot of, allegedly, I mean, I never knew a lot of.
But Alice Mepfessel, who is very funny, very amusing person, no nonsense.
Not very interested in poetry, but who could make Elizabeth laugh.
That's great.
There's a little visual anecdote that Bishop wrote in her notebooks.
And spot her friend Margaret Miller, who she loved very deeply in school and college.
And Margaret ended up with the Museum of Modern Art as a curator.
I think one of the authors was Schwitter's catalog.
Anyway, Margaret leaned out of the car with a comb in her hand and pretended to comb the
round chromium dome of the spotlight.
Then she tied a scarf around its head.
You just, you see that she was so, I'm trying to play.
She was a musician, Schwitter's and Paul Clay, who were two of the wittiest artists, were
also two of her favorite artists.
Well, I mean, Bishop didn't write a vast amount of poetry.
The collective Bishop isn't that big.
Well, it's bigger now than it was before.
But, I mean, what she allowed to be published wasn't very much.
But as some of you may know, she was a great letter writer, I think you already mentioned.
And her sense of humor in the letters is just fantastic.
I think they'll be like Byron's later on.
They'll publish them in 13 volumes.
She'd see, there's a wonderful description in Key West of two pelicans on some kind of
boardwalk or something, and a blowfish, they swoop down and grabbed a blowfish.
And one of them had swallowed it, and blowfish expand.
So it started to expand inside the gullet of this pelican, and he spit it out.
She said like a basketball to the other pelican.
So they started playing basketball with the blowfish.
And you know, Bishop's eye for that kind of the sense of the delightfully absurd.
I mean, in the poem The Bite, I think you see a lot of that where the birds coming back
with like a bligeing retriever.
And it's just very comic, a comic sense of life.
She didn't like appearing in public, and she didn't enjoy giving readings.
And she made a number of recordings, and there are a number of recordings, not many,
there are a number of recordings of her reading.
And they're not very good, and they certainly don't capture the quality of the poem or her
quality.
You know, there was a PBS series called Voices and Visions some years ago, a few decades
ago now.
And the producers of the series actually got the actress Blive Danner to read her poems,
because they couldn't stand the way Bishop read.
I think it was a serious mistake.
You wanted to hear Bishop's voice, and Blive Danner, I hope she's not here today, didn't
hadn't really worked on the poems very much.
But there is one recording, and it's on JD McClatchy's, there's a tape, I don't know
if it's on, I don't even know if it's on a CD.
But there's a tape of Bishop reading, and there's one reading, one poem that she reads,
and it's a comic poem called Filling Station, where she herself actually chuckles at one
of the jokes.
And for me, it's the only recording of hers that actually sounds like the person I know,
because she was so stiff as a reader, but her, just her little jiggle.
Can I read Filling Station?
This is a poem, there's a book called Questions of Travel, it's her third book, and it's divided
into two parts.
One part is called Brazil, and the second part is called Elsewhere.
And the poem Filling Station is in the Elsewhere section, and I always assumed that it was
the Filling Station across the street from her grandmother's house in Great Village.
But in the letters to Anne Stevenson, she says it's in Brazil.
It's on this deserted road in Brazil.
I mean, I just discovered this myself.
But I still think of it as Great Village, Filling Station, or yeah, right, Filling Station.
Oh, but it is dirty, this little Filling Station, oil soaked, oil permeated to a disturbing overall
black translucency.
Be careful with that match.
Father wears a dirty oil soaked monkey suit that cuts him under the arms.
And several quick and saucy and greasy sons assist him.
This is a family filling station, all quite thoroughly dirty.
Do they live in the station?
It's a question.
Do they live in the station?
It has a cement porch behind the pumps, and on it a set of crushed and grease impregnated
wicker work on the wicker sofa, a dirty dog.
Quite comfy.
Some comic books provide the only note of color, of certain color.
They lie upon a big dim doily, draping a tabaret, part of the set, behind a big her suit, begonia.
I think that's where she giggles.
Why the extraneous plant?
Why the tabaret?
Why a why the doily?
Broidered in daisy stitch with margarit, I think, and heavy with gray crochet.
Somebody embroidered the doily.
Somebody waters the plant, or oils it maybe.
It only arranges the rows of cans so that they softly say, so, so, so, to high strung
automobiles.
Somebody loves us all.
She told me that so, so, so was what you said to horses if you were in a buggy, and the
horse gets upset that this is what you say to calm the horses down.
So like when cars started coming into these country towns.
Yeah.
And that's what, so the SO, it's not just the joke on SO, but that is also this.
That's great to know.
That's awesome.
You know, unfortunately we only have less than ten minutes, and I want to give people
from the audience an opportunity to comment or ask questions.
If anyone wants to say something, please come up to the microphone so we can get you on the
recording.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
This was really wonderful, enlightening and informative.
I knew her poetry and I didn't know anything really about her.
I've had this book forever.
And my name is Mero Malofsky, by the way.
And one thing I would like to add to the commentary on the, or wonder actually why it wasn't mentioned
was her social consciousness.
Particularly her Brazil poems, which are, well like the pink dog, which is very powerful.
But also, I'm not going to read it.
I'm just going to read the titles, squatters, children.
And most profoundly, the one that moves me the most, is the burglar of Babylon.
And I'm thinking of her generation and the poets who were socially conscious, like Muriel
Ruchizer.
And our, every generation needs poets to comment and remind us and consolidate our awareness.
And I'm going to do a tiny plug, which is I'm going to be doing, I'm not, you don't
have to, you know, I'm not saying write this down.
But I am going to be doing a presentation at NYU in June that's sponsored by Cleo Psyche.
It's their conference and I'll be part of a panel on psychoanalysis and poetry.
And I think it's very important for psychoanalysis to recognize what poetry actually means in
a world, in an internet instant access world.
And to remember that the poets always spoke for an entire culture.
So thank you for this.
Thank you.
You know, there's something that I thought, this psychoanalytically oriented among us
would be interested to hear.
This is again from the early notebook.
If I stretch my thought to Egypt, to India, downtown, it is in my thought I see them.
And they are not at the time reality for me.
If I go to these places, it's a different matter.
History then is something like a huge circus tent, folding adjustable, which we carry around
with us and set up wherever we are.
It possesses the magical property of being able to take on the characteristics of whatever
place we are in.
In fact, it can become identical with it.
That's an interesting circus tent, though.
Hello, my name is Jane Simon and I want to thank the speakers.
And I also wanted to ask if we know anything about her process from the notebooks.
Did she write in the morning?
Did she write at night?
Did she write every day?
I hear that she wrote a lot of letters.
But you know, because she didn't write many poems that we know of.
That's number one.
And number two, McClatchy mentions that she was a chronic alcoholic.
So I did that.
Do you have any comments about that?
Well, she wasn't an alcoholic.
I don't think to the extent, say, that Barryman.
You know, people didn't worry about her the way that, I mean, they worried about her
in her personal life, but not to step up to the microphone and completely lose it.
But yeah, I mean, particularly in her 40s and Key West, her friends were terrified.
And she took anti-abuse in Brazil for that.
Definitely.
It was a huge part of her life.
And I think it's in the poetry, definitely.
In the process, I mean, there's certainly been references to her waiting for decades
to get a word for a poem.
It's not true.
Where, you know, she had the idea for a poem and she sort of leave a space, I think.
You know, when, and Lull's poem about her talks about her, I wish I could quote it now,
waiting decades for the perfect word.
You make the casual perfect.
Right.
Right.
There are manuscripts.
You can look at, for instance, at Harvard, there's a poem called Crusoe at Home.
You know, it's a draft of the later poem.
There's many examples of her, but we're re-worth things for her.
Crusoe in England, the moose, pink dog, among her masterpieces are poems that took her decades
to complete.
But maybe her most famous poem, One Art, the villain L, in this very complicated form,
took her a week.
And we have all the drafts which Alice has reprinted in Edgar Allan Poe and the Juke
Box.
They are amazing because you see the first version is almost prose and it's all over
the place.
And she instantly figures out that it needs to be in a form.
And she is desperate.
This is a breakup of this relationship with Alice Meth vessel.
And she is on the verge of suicide and maybe has even, even makes a, maybe half-hearted
suicide attempt in the process.
And that poem, working on that poem, I have an absolute conviction.
It's kept her alive.
This is One Art.
Another side of a more comical, maybe side of her process as a young writer, and many
young writers do this, we mentioned that Mary Ann Moore was very important to her.
So not only did they meet and become friends, but they developed a mentor or a protege
relationship and she would send things to Mary Ann Moore.
And Mary Ann Moore would kindly retype them with lots of changes.
And so at a certain point Bishop decided to back off from that particular side of the
writing process of showing Mary Ann Moore everything that she wrote.
Well there's a notorious story where Bishop wrote maybe the most ambitious of her early
poems called Roosters.
It's in her first book.
A War Pong.
A War Pong, yeah.
And she sent it to Mary Ann Moore.
And it has those triple rhymes as like pink dog.
And she's doing something rather daring, almost writing a kind of nursery rhyme, but
it's a very serious and very ambitious poem.
And Mary Ann Moore really didn't get what she was doing and didn't like the triple rhymes
and also wanted her to change the title to the cock.
Right.
Not a good idea.
Not a good idea.
And Bishop, let me just hold up for a second.
I know that a couple of our participants had to like catch buses and things at 3.30.
You're okay?
Okay.
So we can go a little bit longer.
Okay.
We'll let people have their chance.
Thanks.
Okay.
We had an opportunity to look at and listen to the PBS special, which is for anybody's
information online marvelous.
Is it?
Oh, I can get it online.
Full hour.
No interruption.
All right.
So I learned a lot last night preparing to be an audience member and listening.
I wanted to know a little bit more about the character of Friday.
Apparently it was a real person because at one point they made reference to the fact
that she bemoaned the fact that he had passed away of the measles.
So what do we know about this Friday person?
Well, I've always taken that to be a kind of, again, she's doing the Robinson Crusoe
story and Friday of course is the character in Robinson Crusoe.
I think it's her veiled reference to Lotta de Maseto Sowaris.
That is, this was the, in her loneliness, this is the person who comes and rescues her.
Is that the woman?
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
And I mean, you know, in Crusoe in England, Crusoe is a man, Friday is a man.
They talk about if only they could have had children.
You know, it's not exactly an allegory of one to one, but I think that's sort of, in
my mind, that's sort of where Friday comes in and that it's really, and the poem ends
with the death of Friday and it's so heartbreaking because I think that's who she's thinking of.
And Lotta probably committed suicide.
I just want to push back just a little though because I tend to, I think many poems come
from personal experience, but I worry when we reduce poems to autobiography.
I mean, the Crusoe story is one of the great archetypal stories of Western culture and
all of that is important.
And Friday represents the native.
He represents the other world, the third world as it was called then.
And he represents a relationship to the landscape and to the place that Crusoe doesn't have.
And that's universal.
And so I worry when we always want to bring fiction back to fact, that we miss really one
of the great goals of poetry is to share this.
Yeah.
So it's not to contradict anything that's been said, but just to open it.
But I think that's probably where it comes from.
But that we have to see it as, we have to see the story as the...
It's all those things I think.
I think it makes sense for me to think of her.
And it's just like in the moose, I think there's an autobiographical element when she overhears
the conversation about the grandparents and eternity and about someone who's a drinker.
That's her way of bringing in that story.
She's overhearing it.
And that's a wonderful way of bringing in the drinking, I think, because I didn't want
to understate the importance of that in her life.
It was a big project of lotas to help her combat that problem.
She was a very cheap drunk.
So did you take her much to get drunk?
Right.
Yeah.
So she could...
And she knew this.
But so if she had a drink, it wasn't going to stop there because she would immediately
get drunk and then she would keep drinking and she would go on binges.
But in a way, the question about whether she was an alcoholic becomes more complicated
because she wasn't always drunk.
And there were just...
There were long periods while she was on anti-buse for a while, from time to time.
But there were also periods when she just wasn't drinking.
And where she was completely lucid and writing poems.
And maybe she would have written more poems if she didn't have these binges.
And it was a drinking generation.
Children writers.
All drink.
Yes.
How do you think she might have interacted or fared in world like ours today with Facebook
and talk shows and self-exposure?
Do you think... and do you think that there could be an Elizabeth Bishop who fully interacts
electronically today?
Oh, I hope.
You know, I hope so.
But I don't think she...
I can't imagine Elizabeth on Facebook.
She famously said closets, closets and more closets.
Right.
Yeah.
But even just the disappearance of... or the erosion of the idea of territoriality and
regionality because the internet is connecting everybody.
How do you think she might?
Yeah.
That's what I was going to say is I have a poet friend who's wheels on the whole thing,
electronically.
And I said, I don't really do much of it.
And she said, but Jean, you can talk to a poet anywhere in the world.
And you can read their poems.
Anywhere on our little globe.
That must have fascinated the ship if she had gotten that good.
And they could have read her.
Well, now people in Ireland, you can't graduate from high school without learning ten poems
of Elizabeth Bishop.
I mean, out of a hundred, I think.
In the realm of photography and documentary, I've sometimes had to talk to students.
And when I wanted to point out an artist who was to talk about the issue of sentimentality,
I send them to Helen Levitt.
And it occurred to me today, if you know Helen Levitt's work, that there's something very
akin to Bishop in the sense that they're artists who are resolutely unsentimental, I think,
occasionally fierce, but never mean.
There's always this love of the world.
So it occurred to me this connection.
There's one of her wonderful, unpublished poems.
Is her poem about Buster Keaton, called Keaton.
Which is, and it just absolutely figures that Keaton, of all the scream comedians or the
silent comedians, would be the one who was most attractive to Bishop.
And the last line of that poem is, I am not sentimental.
And it starts out, I think, I will be good.
And what Helen Levitt loves is ordinary people.
Just people on the street and animals and children.
And children especially.
And they would be a mask on.
If you want to know about the world, look at children and watch them interacting on the
street.
She certainly had that.
I think it's a great combination.
She would have loved that.
I always think of Walker Evans when I think of Filling Station, though.
It's like a Walker Evans photograph.
Only the tone is a little different.
Right.
All right, but we've gone over about almost 15 minutes.
Well, thank you.
Thank you.
To thank this wonderful, wonderful group, I think Elizabeth Bishop is talking appreciation
to you.
Thank you.
