But I'm saying, I'm not sure.
I think he likes to rip up.
No, not Alberto.
I'm good.
See, that was all thanks.
It says it was awesome.
We can only do it so far.
Actually, I still need to.
So as I'm walking up this hole.
I'm Edward Narcissian, Director of the Helix Center.
Today's program on empathy was suggested to us by
Alberto Manguel and through a discussion with Beverly Zabriski,
we put this round table together.
So Beverly is going to, who's a member of the Executive Committee of the Center,
will introduce the speakers, the participants at the round table.
I just want to tell you that the next round table, which will be the last for this year,
is on mathematics and other realities.
It was proposed by Harold Amsparker, who is a physicist from Zurich.
And that will be the last one for 2019.
And we are looking forward to 2020.
Beverly.
Welcome to everyone here in this room and to the audience,
this room on the live screen, and also those who really watch their YouTube.
So I think we have a wonderful program prepared for you,
and obviously you're going to be the super audience.
I want to just mention to you that this whole event is going to be videoed,
and including your questions, and please know that if you get up and ask a question,
it's considered an automatic release that it's all right for you to then be on YouTube
into infinity actually.
So, again welcome.
And part of the computer center emerged full-blown out of the imagination of Ed Accessian,
and we're very proud that we're able to continue this ability to bring together
the sort of CP snow idea of trying to get the humanities and the sciences together.
And this is our sort of World Series team on the humanities side.
So I'm terribly grateful to all of you for coming,
and I just want to say a few words about each of you, but just in general,
I tried to add up the number of prizes and the number of volumes published by this group,
and it became too long to even begin to mention.
It's an astonishingly distinguished group.
So I'm going to start with Siri here.
I first met Siri when we did an interview together at the Rubin Museum
when there was Young's Red Book exhibit, and in that she spoke as an author,
but also a person who has tremendous knowledge of neuropsychoanalysis,
and she spoke of her own experience, also her own mind-body experience.
And there's nothing so enlightening as to hear one person speak in the most irrefutable way
about what it is to be a human being with both a mind and body.
And her list of awards is enormous, and what book of yours would you most like us to know about?
I'm going to ask each of you that question.
Oh my God, in this group, maybe it's a book the big title is A Woman Looking at Men,
Looking at Women, but inside that book there's a 200-page essay on the mind-body problem.
It's called The Delusions of Certainty. I highly recommend it.
And Yiam Lee is the author of six books, including two story collections,
a thousand years of good prayers, gold boy, emerald girl, and three novels.
And she's also been chosen by The New Yorker as one of the 20 fiction writers under 40 to watch.
Are you still under 40?
No, I'm not.
But we're watching.
And what of your books would you most want this group to read?
Well, I would say my latest novel, Where Reasons and that's the book that I want to keep in life.
Where Reasons and Wonderful.
Good to meet them.
So I've just met today Yiam Lee and I've also just met today, Percival Everett,
who's a distinguished professor of English at the University of Southern California.
And he's come here today to be part of this program from Southern California. Thank you.
It's an author of 30 books, mostly novels. He's won numerous awards, honors, and fellowships,
the most recent being the Distinguished Achievement Award from the Western Literature Association in 2018.
As he puts it, if you do a thing long enough, that just happens.
I haven't noticed that.
Here are a few of his titles, Glyph, Erasure, So Much Blue and Percival Everett by Virgil Russell.
And I am not Sidney Poitier, but we're glad you're you and we're glad you're here.
And Joe is a friend.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, so sorry.
First of all, would you recommend?
The next one.
What's the title?
Telephone.
On the telephone?
Oh, excellent. Thank you.
Joe is a dear friend. He's a professor of comparative literature at Bard, and he's the author of Romantic Europe and the Ghost of Italy.
And he received the Scaglione Prize for Italian Studies.
He's written several books on poetry and cinema and the aesthetics of the Italian art film.
And he also wrote a book about our shared ancestry, the two Italy's, an Italian family in Italy and an Italian family here.
And he also wrote what is probably, I think, an archetypal version of what it's like to use an author to develop empathy.
When he wrote a book, what Dante taught me about grief healing and the mysteries of love.
So, welcome.
I'll recommend that one.
And then Alberto.
This began with Alberto.
We wanted Alberto to come back ever since he did the program on the library a few years ago.
And he has won.
Alberto gets a prize a month. And he's always traveling around the world receiving one.
And he, up until, I think, five years ago, Alberto lived in France and then came, moved here to New York, which is our great gain.
And then he went to be the director of the Argentine National Library, which he did until this past year.
Now he's here living in New York.
And he didn't list any of his books, so I had to look them up.
The ones that I didn't know about.
The last one was called Monsters, Dracula, Alice, Superman, and other literary friends. Fabulous monsters.
So, I'll read them again.
Dracula, Alice, Superman, and other literary friends.
And his own drawings are throughout the book.
Now that you see him, you will recognize his drawings of himself.
Packing my library, which was about packing the 40,000 volumes in his library in France.
And bringing them to the Western Hemisphere.
A reader on reading, a history of reading the library at night.
And there is now a traveling exhibit that Alberto has done of a virtual reality with Robert LaPaj
of the nine great libraries of the world, including his own.
Ten libraries.
Ten libraries.
So it's gone around the world. We're hoping it will come to New York.
So welcome all. And I'm really looking forward to this.
Okay, we're supposed to start everyone.
Do we have any kind of agreement about what empathy is?
Or maybe just when you use the word how you use it, I think it's a good way to begin?
My sense is that there's always, I always define empathy against or in conjunction with sympathy.
And the way I think about it, I don't know what the technical definition is, you can all help me,
is that sympathy is a sort of sharing of pain.
Sim patias, sim patos, and that empathy was a kind of an imagining of or sort of seeing yourself in the place of sort of things.
So almost less visceral than sympathy and a little more intellectual and emphasis more in the imagination.
But that was just my working definition before I got this invitation.
I can say I don't often have sympathy for my characters, but I do have empathy all the time for my characters,
especially bad ones.
I have characters who try to murder people.
I have characters who try to steal babies.
And I think it's hard to be sympathetic, but I always think it's important to be empathetic.
But is that that you're feeling with and in them?
I feel in them. I live in them.
Right, so it's a different definition already. That's why this is interesting.
I live in like characters.
In English, the term begins as a translation of I'm feeling.
It does certainly.
So it's a recent term, but yes, it conveys the idea that you were talking about,
and then you go into the character.
It was aesthetics. It's Robert Fisher.
So it's I'm Fu Lung and it's quite late.
And it's about feeling one's way into a work of art, which was later, I think it's in the little squib about this,
translated into empathy by Tichner.
It's also associated with the idea of abstraction within the wind borling.
Yeah, but in elaborate.
Oh, that was early 20th century 1908.
Dissertation by, I don't remember first name, Borling, who was attempting to write a treatise on the universe.
The universal beauty, the impossibility of it.
And it became a bit of a, what would you call it, a motto for the abstract expressionist in trying to get to a feeling.
And how did he use empathy?
It hasn't been translated and I worked at it really hard. My understanding is that the empathy comes about with the mere abstraction of the feeling.
Yeah, this is the, see how many definitions we have already.
I think I make a distinction myself between, for lack of a better term, maybe judgmental empathy and emotional empathy.
The emotionally being feeling, what other people are feeling, but the other one merely being able to stand in their place and understand their perspective.
I think that's a very important distinction, judgmental and emotional empathy. Because from the point of view of a reader, the empathy you feel with characters is initially an emotional empathy if you feel that empathy.
And then it becomes judgmental. You love the character. Well, a person has a novel that's very powerful called the Water Cure, where a father tortures the man who killed the tortured his daughter.
And you can understand the character, you feel empathy for the character emotional empathy because you say, if somebody that is to one of my children, of course, I would go there.
And then you become judgmental. But I think that's a weaker way of relating to the character.
I think judgment is not empathy.
I mean, I think let's make decisions here. I mean, that's what's important. How can a judgment be empathy?
No, it's not a judgment that's empathy. It's empathy that's judgmental. It's not the same thing.
And empathy can be judgmental if you say, I'm very fond of Little Red Riding Hood, but she should have obeyed her mother.
No, but I think those are two distinct things that we have to separate. In other words, for example, well, I think if we want to be a little bit more careful,
I think if we want to be rigorous, I think there's a rigorous distinction that can be made and that distinction is so if it's about feeling as the other, say in a work of fiction,
while you are swept up in the work of fiction, as Josh Poulais says, the eye of the text becomes one's internal eye, which I think is an avenue to empathy.
In order to make the judgment, you have to in some way withdraw from the text.
I don't think so. I think that when you, for want of a better word, identify with the character, you do it emotionally and almost immediately or simultaneously,
you are judging yourself as that character. So I wouldn't separate them in such neat distinctions, at least for me.
I don't know if you're wondering if there's a difference between readers and writers. And I don't think a writer ever judges a reader can come in with that judgment.
You feel that certain writers should judge.
But I think if you're from a writer's point of view, if you judge, doesn't mean you right away, you lose this empathy for your characters.
It's not necessarily a value to judgment. It's an understanding of perspective.
And that is a judgment, but it's not giving preference to any thinking about that action or that situation.
The thing about empathy that I find troubling, moving through the world, is I wonder if the subjects for whom I'm to feel empathy as a good person
have a certain responsibility? Do I have empathy for, I don't want to do that. You know more thinking about that, I will say.
But I will say John Delinger. Do I have empathy for a murderer, a master.
Well, if I can feel what he's feeling, then I'm afraid. And even if I can put myself into his shoes and imagine what he's doing, then I should be afraid.
So is there a possibility for empathy in that place?
So take an easier example like crime and punishment. Crime and punishment is a great example of entering inside Raskolnikov and a horrifying act.
I mean, I have empathy for Raskolnikov, which is rather frightening. But at the same time, do you think that you would act like that?
No. So you're judging. No, I'm saying, I think that, again, I do think actually that those experiences may, as you say, come right one after another or even on top of each other
or even be a kind of mixed experience. But I do, I don't think that we can call them, that feeling in if we want to do einfutung.
Einfutung is entering in. There's a beautiful work by Edith Stein called on empathy where she talks about empathy as a foreign experience.
But while you're there, you take the place of the subject in real empathy. And then you have to come back to Judge Edith.
I use the example of Joe's book, which moved me very much in the dark forest.
In a dark way. In a dark wood.
That takes as his model the divine comedy. And Joe in losing his wife speaks of Dante losing Beatrice and finding Beatrice.
And the empathy that he feels with that story I feel in his book, while going to the source in Dante, I feel empathy which everything that's happening.
But my empathy with Dante's Beatrice is judgmental because I find her a cold, unfeeling woman who I am not supposed to judge because I'm not supposed to understand the justice of God.
So there are so many levels. I don't think that there is a cut off point in what the reader feels and what the reader judges and what the reader then reflects back to the reader saying this is thereby, except for the grace of God, go why.
This is how we identify with certain characters that don't you think?
Now that you've grown up the book, I think the one thing I could say is where it seems like you're too at loggerheads is that you are emphasizing that feeling in and you say that can't happen with judgment because judgment is a kind of established as a distance.
And Alberto is saying, well, do we have to separate them necessarily? One can feel one's way into a text and also while one's doing so doesn't necessarily have to suspend judgment.
I guess what I would say in the case of reading my story into this character Dante, what I learned afterwards, I had studied Dante for decades really and I had written heavily foot-noted stuff on him and whatnot, but I found that empathy could actually be a cognitive
journey because I felt when I heard Dante's voice and it was more, less Beatrice and more of the loss of Florence because he went into exile.
So he had lost his hometown and wandered through Italy the last 20 years. The poem came alive to me when I could, there's a passage in a paradiso when he says, should it ever come to pass that this sacred poem to which Heaven and Earth have set their hand
basically would get me back to Florence, then I will take the Laurel Crown as poet and hearing that voice, empathizing with the poem for the first time rather than seeing as an object of study, brought me, I think, scholarly insights.
Even the Canto he's, there's this famous Canto he's the Canto of Ulysses, right, in Inferno which was so influential for Primo Leivie, helped him keep his humanity and Auschwitz. When I had studied that Canto for decades but only after my late wife's death and going back to my hometown as I needed my family's help to raise our daughter,
I sensed that same sense of Ulysses not being able to go back to Ithaca. And so that was an empathetic thing that to me brought this great cognitive insight.
I kind of without birth to in the sense that one can read oneself in and invest in something and at the same time it doesn't have to have that suspension of judgments.
Thoughts are that feeling doesn't generate all kinds of intellectual activity. I think it does. And I think then, you know, I'm sorry to bring that science into it. But for example, if you look at what you think of as possibly forms of pre personal
empathy in a phenomenon such as mirror neurons that almost everybody has heard of, I think it's was found in my cock monkeys in the early 90s where a monkey grasping a banana, the same neurons are firing as the monkey who's watching.
Right. So it's action perception. This also appears to be present in human beings. It is something that may become conscious in something like mirror touch synesthesia where you look at someone else being touched and you have a sensation
yourself. So motor sensory forms of empathy exist without that intellectual ingredient. The mirror touch synesthesia is not thinking about Oh, geez, what does it mean to feel this or that? It's a motor sensory response.
So that's what I'm trying to make certain distinctions like that. Now that motor sensory response was considered very important in the 19th century when I'm food and was being discussed.
Lips, for example, all these different German theorists, they were interested in the motor sensory responses usually to visual art. Right? No, what you say is important in terms of the relationship that readers or writers have with literature.
The physical learning or the mirror learning in society of empathy in the sense of feeling other people suffering and needs and opinions.
Do you think that literature is a better gateway to learning these things than the actual being in society? It's a good question. Yes.
I think about when you mentioned that the monkeys, there's a shared experience that's necessary for that empathy. The one monkey has to know about food.
And so if you ask me to feel empathy for someone during their homicidal act, I have no experience with that. And so I don't think it's possible for me to have anything other than a cognitive sort of empathy toward that person.
I can see why you might have wanted to kill this person. But it's a bad thing.
The novelist, when I have a character who does a horrific thing in the character that you mentioned who tortures the man who he believes.
Yeah, that's worse. He's not sure. If the murderer of his daughter certainly as soon as I imagined him doing something wrong.
It's not that I imagined him doing something that I would or would not do. He's doing a bad thing. And that's never divorced from my thinking about him or his action.
That doesn't mean I don't have feelings for what he's doing.
You have to be when you're writing.
Don't remind me. You said that as a writer you don't have that relationship to your characters.
Because our person said you felt that he was doing something wrong. And I think maybe for my experience, one of my biggest fears growing up was had I been born in cultural revolution, would I become one of the teenagers who would be the teacher to death.
And I always thought, well I could. There's no reason to say no, absolutely not. So I wrote this character who picked the pregnant mother, deformed the baby.
I think at least in the writing part of it, I felt I could be that person. When you said frightening, it was one of the most frightening experiences. Empathy can be frightening.
I was going to ask, I think it might be an important distinction to draw as to whether any important human emotions don't always partake of judgment of some sort.
Like I think we're trying to draw out this idea that within the feeling it already falls within a context that involves judgment at some level.
Maybe not moral judgment, like oh you should go to jail, but some sort of value judgment of some sort.
But do you think that what restraints us from acting out our feeling of empathy for a character that is doing things that are judge-torable?
Do you think that in the feeling of empathy itself or as you were suggesting it comes later as something separate as judgment? When I look at the rascal Nick of, am I seeing someone who acts in a way that I think is justifiable?
Yeah, I think maybe going to child development will help a little bit, right? So that there's a certain moment, you know, and it's various depending on the researchers when the idea of empathy is possible.
But very early on in human life infants will imitate the faces of adults. There are certain infant researchers who believe that empathy arrives much earlier or that children get a sense of, you know, relationality to the other, the mother usually much earlier.
So the question then again is obviously an infant is not making any judgments. Does that mean that very young children or infants are incapable of empathy? I don't think so.
And in fact, one year olds now, this is, you know, in some of the research seem to have very empathetic responses, but they may not be saying, oh, this is a good thing that I'm patting mom because she's crying.
But is there not a difference between those physical learnings and the ones that come through the relationship to fiction and art in general?
Well, you know, I think if you think about this as a literature professor, this I think about this all the time, and I'm kind of of two minds on it.
On the one hand, it strikes me as if you ask the question, it suggests a priori that literature has kind of lost its place as a cultural value in itself because you're asking, can we instrumentalize it a bit?
Is it going to make us better? Your brain on Jane Austen, is that going to make you a better person?
But again, I realize we live in the real world and we have to answer those questions. You know, for the ancient Greeks, it was this idea of catharsis. So if you did see something, you did see a murderous display on stage, somehow was supposed to cleanse you of those similar things.
So it did have that kind of socially, I'm sorry, socially social balance. Today, I think, you know, in terms of does literature breed empathy, the way I look at it is like, I think of Aristotle's definition.
He says, history tells us what happened, it gives us something concrete, something real, but it's contingent. In epic poetry, we can extrapolate from that literature, gives us these universals.
It's like you said in your talk at Bard, Erare non fazzy, right? Errors? They're not true, Dante, right? They're not necessarily true, but they're somehow real. Like, I think of literature as creating these real situations out of the make-believe that, of course, we can empathize with them by analogy.
You know, take, for example, Virginia Woolf's to the Lighthouse. It's fiction, right? But to me, what will tell you more about a woman's experience in the 1920s? What will help you empathize more?
Or a boy's experience? For me, the empathy was at the very beginning when the mother promises to take him to the Lighthouse, and the father says, if it doesn't rain, and the father says it will rain.
The kid wants to murder the father. I think that that was so true because it pops up so many times. Somebody who looks at that negative side and just dismantles that whole illusion that you have created.
But you were talking about Aristotle, let's be a little pedantic here. Aristotle uses the word empathy only once. No, you mean catharsis.
No, I hate catharsis, but he uses the word empathy and battles just once. And he uses it to indicate an imitation. He talks about a coward, and when the coward reads about soldiers escaping, the coward will feel this in his hands.
It's very similar to what we are saying that it reflects in our own psyche, but we still haven't solved whether judgment is in the Lighthouse.
No, but I think it's very interesting to make the distinction between human experience in the world and what happens when we read a work of fiction and how it's different.
And I think there's something I like to call it the aesthetic frame, whatever you want, that there's a safety involved in dangerous experiences in fiction that allows us an exit, but it also allows us an expansion of consciousness, not possible in the real world because I would not have coffee with Russ Kolnikov.
So, you know, I would save myself that experience, but in literature you don't have to.
But that is the extraordinary instrument that we have invented as a species to survive, which is the imagination, that allows us to have an experience before having the experience, not having an experience at all.
And also, I think that literature in all these works and yours organizes that chaotic fragmentation of reality were in order to make sense of what surrounds us every day, what we experience every day.
We need to turn it into a story that we tell ourselves, but it's better when we read it in the Bronte's or that kind of culture also conditions us in our reception of art and one of the things that I find distressing.
Now, it's the voyeuristic side of consuming art.
And we see it all the time, we see it whenever there's a film, it's based on a true story.
And that's a sewing device. It's not a true story. Even the difference is it's all made up and it can be good or bad.
But it's a country of the lines that writers used to do. This is not based on it.
The most egregious example of this, I once got a book that was a novel.
And the editor had sent a little note out. The novel was about a rape.
And in the letter it said, and just so you know, the author of the novel actually was raped and she is allowing, you know,
he's going to talk about the actual rape in relation to the fictional rape.
And I remember, listen, it might have been a wonderful book, but I just put it down.
And this is, you know, what was Simone Vail said, 75% of our life is imagination and fiction.
And that's not known.
But just to play devil's advocate a bit, because obviously, you know, by necessity,
I'm aligned with this position as a teacher of books of literature and I want them to, you know,
permeate the world and people to be reading constantly.
But I think, for example, my mom, right, she's an immigrant from Southern Italy.
Great school education, very intelligent woman, but she's not a reader, never has been.
She's a deeply empathetic person.
Now, just one half to, in other words, I wonder what literary people, if they back themselves into a whole,
if they push the literature makes you more empathetic model.
It makes you not, has the possibility of making you. But if you go that way, it's easier than experiencing
all this shit that surrounds us in the world and faltering it.
I hear you, so I guess what I'm saying is there is another way to frame or contextualize the literature,
expand empathy argument. You mentioned an expansion of consciousness.
And, you know, now I'm thinking a lot because I don't know what that frame would be,
but I just worry about a kind of, you know, there's a tendency in literary criticism now with a neuro criticism
where they're sort of finding what your brain does as you read a certain book.
I think it's fascinating. It's wonderful, but I also feel like it's part of the dominant, you know,
the scientific discourse is always going to take precedence over the humanistic one
and kind of now it's even starting to drive literary services.
I'm sorry, in the Middle East, one time I go.
Your mother might be the Roger Federer of feeling empathy.
As a tennis man, it would be very cruel to my dad.
However, if she were the person who ever had a practice would make her better at, I think.
No, no, no, but these are, I think these are great points, actually. So we don't want to say,
which, by the way, in some of these studies, there is Keith Oatley, I don't know if you know who he is,
he's the person who's sort of gone the furthest, making the argument that reading literature
makes you more empathetic, they've done empirical studies, et cetera, et cetera.
If you look at some of those studies, I think methodologically there are some fudgy stuff in there.
And is empathy, if we're talking about feeling in or feeling as, always the best thing?
Or it certainly isn't enough for reading literature, man.
I didn't think about this.
We, as readers, have a certain experience, which is individual, it's not collective,
but it's not the same from one reader to the other. So I trust my experience with literature,
and I know that throughout my childhood where I didn't have a relationship with any other human beings,
except one nanny until I was eight, I knew the world, I knew adventures in death and love and betrayal,
and I knew all these things from stories, and so I trust that.
I hear that I guess my thinking is I do think there are some things, some contemporary issues that literature really does,
reading more and reading better really does affect. For example, one's ability to detect fake news.
I really think that the more, seriously, the more you, because literature is fundamentally an active processing verbal information,
imagining out from that, and sort of, it holds critical thinking along with creative imaginative thinking.
I do think that one can essentially index that the more one reads, the more one is exposed to literature,
the less likely one is to be susceptible to fake news. So that I would go on a limb on scientifically.
I'm wondering how to sort of contextualize the rubric of empathy within something that is more aligned with what reading is,
which is processing stories and narratives and working with language. That's my question.
It's just that literature gives us the words to say what we experience, and that is enough.
So, I did this experiment with a class one time. When you say literature gave them the words to say things,
but oftentimes young students would just say things about themselves. So I give them an assignment.
I say, this is going to be an assignment. You do not write yourself about yourself, write about something else,
and use an inanimate bobjack. It turns out the backpack is talking about them.
So, there's a sneaker, so they're talking about them.
They're good readers because literature talks about you all the time, points of finger at you and saying,
this is you or this is not you.
Are we, you know, sometimes maybe reading or thinking of the after narrowing down themselves?
Of course, we're reading stories all the time. And not just on pages.
We look at our window and we see two people we don't know having a discussion,
and we read their body language to read the facial expressions.
And when they look at the unlocked side door in your house, then you start reading the situation differently.
So it's a constant thing that we do. What we don't have in that situation is access to the interior worlds of those people.
And that's what literature does.
Absolutely right.
That's right. Because we're creating narratives, I mean, out of that situation all the time.
You see someone go into a store and she comes out with a bag.
We haven't seen anything inside the store, but we link the events and create a narrative out of it.
I want to reframe this just a bit because actually sort of psychodynamically empathy is quite neutral.
It can be used in a positive sense or a negative sense.
And the best example of that was a German film, The Lives of Others,
where a Stasi agent is incredible as a torturer because he can feel right into someone.
And certainly people who are analysts and therapists know how careful one has to be by even just echoing something.
One has said to you because it could go straight in like an arrow, not a bomb.
And then at the end of the film he's developed positive empathy for the people that he was originally torturing
and then comes to their rescue.
But it's very neutral and can be a very dangerous weapon.
And I don't want to politicize things, but before Alberto, I mean, when Alberto first mentioned this theme,
right after that Obama put out his list of what he was reading this year.
And he said the point was to develop empathy through reading for others that we don't know.
But we know that people in power can use empathy in a very negative and destructive way.
So I don't want to sentimentalize the word.
But wouldn't it be actually if you're torturing someone then if you were having empathy you would be also feeling the torture?
No, you see that's what, but you feel that you're thrilled about the other person's being tortured.
And that would usually fall into psychopathic kinds of reading.
But empathy can be used extremely well by connet.
I mean that's the point. I just don't want it to get sentimental.
Actually if you, looking at the research on this, torturers, people, you know, they would not fall into the empathetic category
because they couldn't be feeling, they can be reading the other very well.
But if you're actually experiencing, say, in the Edith Steinthink that you're experiencing some form of pain along with your victim,
that's what you're arguing.
No, I'm saying that you can get turned on by it.
The digression is a very large turn on and sadism is, I just want to keep it real here.
That's right.
So sadism is when you have an erotic response to the other's pain.
And the erotic response you were reading then as empathy.
No.
No, I'm sorry, I just want to get it straight.
Yeah, it's definitely the point.
I'm just suggesting that we have to keep in mind the purpose and the motivation for empathy.
And if one knows how to feel into somebody else's pain, one can use that as a weapon.
And that there is a kind of, you could call it erotic or not, but there is a turn on.
There's a whole turn on that happens.
And I think that's what we're seeing in our society now.
I just listened to a program on NPR today of an ICE agent and what they were going through
as they were turning people away at the border.
So we just have to be very aware of what we use our capacity to feel into other people's experience.
No, I'm sorry.
No, go ahead.
No.
No.
What about people who don't experience empathy?
Yeah, that's what I've been saying.
The reason I'm asking is, you know, I'm raising a child who's an Asperger, you know, an autism spectrum.
He's very articulating.
He said, I feel sympathetic about a lot of things, but I just don't feel empathy.
And I just wonder what about people who don't feel empathy?
And do they train themselves by reading or do they learn?
I think the research on this on psychopathic and then autism, which is very different.
But the research on psychopathic is all over the place.
They know that guilt and empathy seem to go together.
But having no empathy also means having no guilt.
And the reasons are everything from neural networks to, you know, being raised in a certain way to, you know, it's just endless.
Nobody knows.
But empathy can be used as a tool.
I'm referring to what Beverly said about torture.
During the military dictatorship in Argentina, France sent their torture specialists
from the war of the Deers towards Argentina to train the military in torture.
And the documents were published.
And so one of the things was that the torture has to feel, and they use the word empathy for the victim,
in order to know what will hurt the victim most, because sometimes it's not a physical pain.
And so they, well, I won't give you examples because they're horrible.
But it wasn't a question of empathy in order to feel that person's pain.
It was empathy in order to know that person's pain and normal order to direct the needle.
So what is the difference between drawing and feeling?
I mean, in a way, that's a pretty good question.
It is. But could part of it be back to the start of our conversation, when one is sympathetic
towards someone, one shares, the sense that word has the word sharing built into it.
Empathy doesn't. I agree. I think you're right.
I mean, empathy is a neutral.
It happens and it can be used for good or ill.
But sympathy seems different.
Maybe sympathy is that sharing of pain that sort of would
harness the potentially negative applications of empathy.
But it also has a certain connotation, sympathy of arrogance or super seriousness.
I feel sympathy towards what you are doing, but I can't condone it.
Why can't condone it?
So I put myself in a position of excusing or not excusing what you're doing.
But from a higher level, instead empathy goes into the character, goes into the person that you're facing.
No?
Yeah, I agree.
It's feeling as. That's what I think the usual definition is.
It's not knowing.
It's not knowing.
To me, it's feeling as.
Well, that becomes an epistemological question.
It certainly is.
But imagine two people who are in the same accident and they both lost children in this accident.
Does it make sense to say that one feels sympathetic to the other when they were experiencing the same thing?
Would one ever say that?
Would one person say to the other, I feel sympathy for you?
No, I can't imagine that. But neither can I imagine the use of the word empathy in that circumstance.
But obviously, we're talking about two people who would be capable of either.
But would you define this a very interesting situation?
What would you call that feeling between these two people?
Well, that shared experience, I don't have a word for it.
There's a PR news a few years ago about the two girls in Wisconsin.
They were, they were, they cut school and they were lying down on the train track.
Just having a conversation and they both fell asleep.
And the train came and cut all four legs.
And that's the situation where they said the two girls were teenagers.
They said only we know each other now what we experience.
So it's not even I feel the pain in my leg or, but exactly we know what we know each other.
They said.
Well, maybe the way to answer the question would be through an analogy, a fictional analogy.
Is the scene in Othello early on where Othello, who's this great general, but he's like in his 40s,
which was really old back then.
Wasn't the new 20, right?
It was like being 60 today or something.
And he's married Desdemona, the most eligible woman in all of Venice.
And the senators can't handle this, that there's this great general, but he's a more, he's a foreigner, right?
He's not of the Italian aristocracy.
And they call him to account.
And they say, Othello, what potion did you give Desdemona?
How did you be witcher?
And he says, basically, I told her my life story and to hear it, what does Desdemona seriously incline?
He told her story.
So that's an example of a story, a fictional construct eliciting a, he uses the word compassion.
And it's like, is that a sympathetic, to me that's a sympathetic reaction, a sharing, you know,
to harp on the rule of the word, rather than an empathy.
It's so powerful.
And he says, that's the only witchcraft that I used, right?
Along with lines, I wanted to ask about the sort of interface between imitation, which does come up in some of the neuro,
neuroscience studies, but everyone knows what imitation is.
On the one hand, how does that interface with empathy?
And I think this also gets to the question of knowing versus feeling.
I'm thinking of people who have autism, let's say, in our idiosyncrasance, and they could play these gorgeous, you know,
bock fugues with what appears to be great feeling.
And I defy any of you to say they are having the feeling, they're not having the feeling, it's quite confusing.
But imitation is somehow interrelated with empathy.
Absolutely, the fictional example, Parix and Oncis, Donkey Quotty, who imitates the heroes of the novels of Shivery,
he is red, and he does it very well.
It's the world that's not prepared for his ethics.
But that's a little like trying to identify a speech act, and the story that I'm reminded of is the philosopher's old joke about the parent.
Where the plumber comes to the door and he knocks, no one is at home with the parrots, who is it?
And the plumber responds, the plumber.
He knocks again.
The parrot says, who is it?
He responds again until the man is so worked up, he bangs in the door, the door crashes and he falls down dead of a heart.
The family comes home and they look on the plate and say, who is it?
And the parrot says, the plumber.
And the parrot says, the plumber.
Is he making sense?
Right, right.
Well, and I mean, the imitation thing, I think this is a great question actually.
I mean, Darwin talks about it in his book about emotions in human beings and animals and how there's a mimicry that's part of certainly mammalian
experience.
And that's, you know, I mentioned the baby's imitating faces and then that response seems to go away, actually, with maturity.
And in certain neurological patients, there's chronic imitation as well.
It says if there's some form of disinhibition that has happened through the injury and people just start imitating the doctor, for example, if they're in conversation with the doctor.
You know, what is the connection between these imitative responses or if you're reading a book?
The thing that Jadui calls, I love this, organic clicks.
He talks about that when you're reading poetry and, you know, either the sounds or the music or the meanings of the words create these, you know, moments of excitement or Suzanne Langer.
And another great philosopher, I think, about experiencing art, not just as, say, these judgments or thoughts or intellectual experiences, but also as rhythmic experiences that are very much embodied.
And that through that embodiment, there are meanings attached to that.
I mean, poetry, I mean, Dante, who you talked about is a great example of music being part of the experience of walking with Dante, which is very much a block.
But I certainly don't think we should disassociate intellect from feelings, I think.
No, I agree with you.
But I'm saying that we can never, let's talk about rhythm and music as part of the experience that is connected to empathy.
Certainly.
But also absolutely and extricably connected to one's intellect as well.
I don't think you can separate feelings and intellect.
Yeah, I think what you're saying is very important in your introduction of the word compassion.
Because to me, what you get through literature is a kind of enlightenment at the same time as empathy.
You get enlightened about people's lives.
I've just read a series of novels that all take place in Eastern Europe.
And I would never have a sense of what it is like to live there as I had read these books.
So I think enlightenment and empathy and literature go together.
That's a great point.
I was reading, this is really totally off the wall Italian writer, Kurzio Malaparte, who had all sorts of fascist associations.
But he wrote this book, The Kremlin Ball.
And growing up during the Cold War, we grew up with this idea of the evil empire, right?
That there was communism versus democracy.
And we all know that, of course, there have been so many historical abuses of it.
But it's hard to forget the original intent of it, where there was a scene where he describes the workers coming home.
And for the first time being able to go to the theater, and this image of these workers streaming out of the trams and Moscow and going to the theater straight from the factory, you know, we of course know that historical experiment failed terribly.
But just that image is like rescued, like you say, it's rescued from time in literature.
It's, you know, whether it was, I think it was a fictionalized account with based in fact, but where else would you get that?
But we go back to what we were saying, based on fact, Malaparte is a wonderful example of somebody who tells the story that you think is real because you feel it is real.
But he makes stuff up in the skin where he's talking about the American occupation of Naples.
The key scene is where they all starting and they start eating the fish in the aquarium, the famous aquarium of Naples.
And the last dish is the mermaid that they have a very big creature on a slaver to the table. So he makes you feel empathy for a time and a people, a historical situation, creating fictions, not giving you the number of people who died or that kind of fact.
And in fact, it may not be necessary or so what does the question?
So a question I would have for all of you is I think that was beautifully put, Alberto.
If a society reads less and we are reading less, you know, all the statistics show, and I think it's 30% less the last 10 years, you know, the average American reads 17 minutes a day and spends a combined six hours, something like that on television and social media.
What effect will that have?
I mean, is there, will that somehow work against our capacity for things like compassion or use the word enlightenment, Beverly?
What would be, you know, if we could even speak of it in terms of empathy or just, I'd love to hear your thoughts on what will happen if a society continues to engage with literature less and less as ours is.
Well, you know, a little bit of populace is pretty new.
Yes, so it's just making mass literacy.
It's not a question of already getting worse as a question of can we be better with it?
And then there was a, um, um, leaves of grass.
What would be, and by blue Ontario, sure, and I'm paraphrasing with him, which is okay because it's with him.
He's, he writes, um, if you want a better society, produce better people.
And I think that's what we, that's our opportunity, not that we can be nostalgic for better people.
Just that we know we're capable.
But we have, uh, every generation has a fake nostalgia for something that never happened.
Yeah, we think, uh, before we read everybody had books.
But when we really think of what happened in my class in high school, we were too to connect books.
And the others were busy with soccer and all sorts of other things.
We weren't a community of readers.
There's tiny percentage of readers.
Every society since the invention of writing.
And, uh, as you say, we hope that maybe those readers can contribute to make better people.
But from the evidence now, it's not happening.
I think also every generation has fake panic.
Yes.
You know, I read, there's this letter, E.B. White, in 1930s, he saw the first television set.
And he really panicked.
He said, this thing, this machine is going to destroy culture.
Yeah, and I think we're doing fine.
Yeah, we forgot.
So think about the alarm about the book.
Yeah.
The technology of the book was a terrifying technology.
Uh, the train, and you see, it's, you know, these moral panics, moral panics about the novel in the 18th century.
That, you know, one-handed reading, everyone, that was the terror.
That young women were going to go into their mood wars, you know, literate girls, and get off on these romance stories.
And that's why slaves were forbidden to learn to read.
Absolutely.
Absolutely.
That was a terrifying prospect.
That and that freedom thing.
Yeah.
But, um, no.
I wanted to ask about this idea that maybe some good writers, not me, perhaps all, are particularly strong in having empathy.
And then what's the relationship between that and sort of just general creativity?
Because it seems there are some writers who write imagined worlds that they've never experienced and are so wonderful and portraying it.
So, is there a relationship?
I should think that there's a relationship with, between good literature and great empathy.
Some of the best writers in the world were horrible people who would kick children in the street.
Um, no, I was wondering whether some writers may benefit from being so empathic.
I know not all.
I think that's what it's called as the readers.
Yeah, there are differences with the readers.
Yeah.
Oh, it's, it's...
I'm a different reader from day to day.
Mm-hmm.
So, um, so I can never, uh, or I'm looking to finish a novel.
Um, I can have this idea that I'm going to address these feelings on, but I'm a moving target.
But when I think of everyone who's going to read it, it's going to mean something different to all my five or six readers.
Um, and, and,
and it's, it's not my job to set them up for anything.
Um, whether I'm empathetic or not, it's my job to create a world.
No.
Am I a better, I hope?
But you raise an interesting point because today, there are many readers who say one can only imagine a world,
one should only write about a world that one has lived.
Yes, I know.
Well, I'll see that.
That, that, that whole, um, lazy...
It's not your story.
Um, um, um,
then you wouldn't read the Bible.
Right.
You wouldn't read much, actually.
I mean, you know, I feel like I, you know,
in many ways I leave a sort of narrow light, you know, in my new house,
walking up to stairs and writing and then eating dinner.
I mean, I wouldn't, you know, yes, it's about, I think it does expand our experiences.
It's about really what's saying.
We carry these, you become fat with books after a while, right?
And it's interesting that apparently those little studies, I mentioned the oldly, uh, studies that non-fiction does not have the same effect as fiction.
Right.
And this is a sort of interesting thing.
And also, guys, there was a gender difference.
Now, I don't mean us here at this table.
Of course not. What I mean is that in the general populace, men avoid fiction.
They had lower fantasy levels.
Uh, and, um, you know, there was like a whole, and it was not-
But you know, I read a book with one hand.
Yeah.
Like this.
So, it's so different.
In the audience, you have a majority of women, whatever you, in the literary events.
In literature and in science, it's reversed, right?
So I do the two kinds of talks.
One for a literary audience, one for like neurologists, uh, uh, uh, uh, neuro science people, and then it's reversed.
It's about 80% men.
Now, we live in a culture that has divided these two.
I mean, speaking of the helix center.
And I think it's certainly a problem for boys if they grow up thinking that reading novels or poems are a-
For sissis.
For sissis.
And that- that's a losing proposition for the culture.
Uh, you- I- I- uh, thought of a question, but it's perhaps too personal.
You said that your son is autistic?
Does he read?
He does.
Yeah.
How does he read?
He reads- I- he's reading interesting because he was in middle school a couple years ago when he was reading Enocharana.
Wow.
And it was- I was amazed that he chose the book himself, and I specifically asked him about how he felt about each of the characters.
For instance, he really liked Steve-a.
I said, well, you are not a judgmental person.
I said, you are not a
reality-a-fair.
He said, well, yes.
And he really- he liked everybody because not in his words, everybody is having so much trouble in life in that book.
Yeah.
And I think- I don't think- I think he does express- he doesn't really have the ability to feel empathy, but he sees these things.
Would you say that he doesn't have that ability or he doesn't know how to put it into words?
I think that's the expression.
Expressive language is part of it, yes.
He sounds empathetic.
To me too.
I like Steve-a.
I think he's smart enough to feel like it.
He really can't employ the words.
Yeah.
But it's interesting when you say the boys are, you know, are- are more- push more into the sign.
And I have noticed that- like I teach at Princeton and the students who come in, often the boys are from STEM.
You know, they take writing class.
They take literature class with the- with the idea that, you know, they cannot really make a living by reading or writing.
They still have to go back to be their engineers.
Yeah.
That's the reality they face.
Yeah.
But at Princeton, those guys are not frightened of feeling the feminine if they read a novel.
But I think there's something a little deeper.
I mean, as a woman novelist, there are two of us here, that people- that- this happens to me all the time.
When you sign books, if men come up, they say, I don't read fiction but my wife says, would you sign the book to her?
And I've been pondering this for years now.
And first of all, I think, why didn't your wife come?
Number one.
Number two.
I- I- I wouldn't- so- so- so- and then I realized that, you know, again, when you read, you have to submit yourself to the text, to the authority of the text.
That's part of the joy for me anyway.
It's a form of opening yourself to this other voice, an internal narrator that takes over your own, yours is gone, and that voice is there.
And that passionate submission is hard for men who are invested in the idea of masculinity and those particular hierarchies.
Well, there's- I said, part of experiencing art- experiencing art is- is venue, and- and- and also, um, circumstance I was- I- I don't give a lot of readings early on.
I was reading in Maryland, and a man came up to me, and he was obviously interested in the fact that I had written a book.
And- and his- and his question, he was trying to process- he was a contractor, I learned from talking to him, and he was trying to process this.
He wasn't familiar with- with novels, and- and his question was, did you type all of this yourself?
And- and- and- and I immediately sought it.
This wasn't necessarily for him to understand the art in some level. I said, well, yes, sir, I did.
And that- and that was- that was good for him. He- he- he could- he could accept that.
Right.
Um, so it's not only of what's in a novel, it's what surrounds a novel.
Of course.
Um, and I think that's really, um, uh, maybe that's-
Well, that's right. So that- I think these, if you want to talk about power structures or perceptions, they're all part of our reading experiences.
And I know in my life that there have been moments when I've been open to a text, and moments when I've been closed, and I've had to go back at another moment in my life, then suddenly I'm able to get it.
You know, I've changed. The text is the same.
But it's true that, um, certain people, and not just men, certain women, are not able to submit to the text.
You just give them a sort of- it was an anecdote. Um, uh, Edward was signing books.
A man came up to her and said, would you sign this for my wife?
And she said, what about you, big boy?
That's it. I couldn't use it. I'll- I'll get more credit.
But again, in our culture, the way we read and approach fiction in that naive way, it really happened.
A woman asked me about a novel in which the main character's head is severed from his body in the first scene.
It's sewn back on, and the novel proceeds, and it's a lobster.
Um, but the, uh, this woman came up to me and she's, again, trying to process- is this all a biographical?
This lady who's sitting up here.
Well, I know that there are many in the room who would love to ask some questions if you're open to this.
Totally.
And we know we all have fabulous stories to tell, but I ask that we limit ourselves to real questions, and not declarations or narratives.
So, uh, and remember, you will be on the Internet forever.
That's a little bit of witness intimidation, I think.
Yes, please.
Oh, yes, and please do come up to the mic.
I can't find it like this. I asked a question about internal cancer.
And you thought of oxygen- Oh, right.
Your level is there, help.
And of course- Can you speak louder?
I'll go on.
That's like, what is it?
Opsy-toasten.
Chemistry.
The chemistry of, uh, empathy.
Where are you?
Where am I? Do we have it?
And can we exhibit it?
Are there other oxytocin people?
I don't even know how to spell it.
Yeah, so it's, um, it's, um, a hormone that's been associated with trust.
And the thing is, it's also been associated with schadenfreude and other emotions.
So the early ideas about oxytocin as the trust drug, it's there in pregnancy, lactation, and birth.
And so there was this idea that- and it's true if you- if people inhale oxytocin, most people get more trusting.
I mean, there are empirical studies that suggest this, but it's also a lot more complicated than that, as you might imagine.
It's not the trust love.
My God, they put it in our water.
Yes, heaven, heaven for kids.
Um, but also, for example, there's something that interests me a lot.
That borderline patients, um, it's a personality disorder, psychiatric disorder.
If you give oxytocin to controls and borderline patients, the borderline patients have exactly the opposite response.
There are about three, at least three papers that I've read on this.
And what is the opposite response?
They get the upset, tense, anxious, and of course this may be related to earlier attachment issues, um, that are probably part of what we think of as borderline personality disorder.
So it's- it's complicated what it has to do with empathy.
Earlier I was talking about, I think, attachment questions are important to think of in terms of empathy and- and the development of the individual person.
So- but that's about the chemistry I have.
You have to come up here.
Hi.
I have a question about, um, so based on the discussion, my understanding is sympathy is feeling- sorry, sharing the feeling why empathy is feeling into feeling as someone.
So I have two questions, is it correct then that empathy is more powerful to motivate action because you feel as someone?
And then the second question is, in the thought experiment, if we humanity has to choose between the two, which one should we have and why?
What is that?
What does it say?
No, you have to answer it.
Um, hi.
We have a question.
We have a question.
It was a very good- it was a-
Yeah, that was a- a great question.
Um, I don't know if one has to choose between the two.
In fact, I- I- as a writer, I- I imagine that they work, uh, in tandem, that- that- that- that sympathy and empathy are necessarily part of the same- the same thing, um, which is an attempt to-
to use a really ordinary word.
Understand someone's, uh, perspective and then their- in their situation.
Um, and as you point out, why we want to understand that can be very different.
I might want to understand it so I can know how to get to you, but I might also want to understand it so that I know how to feel.
Mm-hmm.
And I think, you know, I'm thinking of literature, this is the ending of, um, Tequila Mockingbird when Scout walks back to Boo Radley's house.
And it's like literally the first time she's been on his porch and looked down into the world from his perspective, right?
And her dad had said, never judge someone until you walked a mile in his shoes.
So that to me is the seamless blending of empathy and sympathy.
She's imagining life as Boo Radley.
And she feels- she says, it made me sad that we've never given him anything.
So she sympathetic towards him.
So I think that, you know, at its best the two are working in tandem and some stories can just capture that blend so- so pitch perfectly.
Right.
You too.
Oops.
Go ahead.
No, no, no.
I- I wonder if sometimes we do use sympathy as a shortcut so not to push ourselves to be unpathetic.
Because as our Bertels said, you know, we say, I feel sympathetic about the situation which it just ends the discussion.
Mm-hmm.
Okay, but when someone say someone loses someone, you don't say, I send my deepest empathy.
No.
And you really feel I send my deepest- I don't see the dismissiveness of it.
To me it's an immersion and someone else's- to me it's compassion, the term earlier.
Yes, but you know, you can sign that sympathy card as a politician who is- who wants to express that and be acknowledged for expressing it.
And that's different from someone who is feeling sympathetic but also empathetic thinking about-
Right.
Right.
Interesting that you also write condolences because you are saying, consoling, to feel pain with you.
Mm-hmm.
And that is, I think, a more interesting emotion.
That's- That's-
I think people can have too much empathy.
You know, the doctors, for example, the psychiatrist, I have a seminar, a narrative psychiatry at Weill Cornell.
And these psychiatric residents, we talk a lot about empathy and how to manage empathy.
Because, you know, if you're feeling really what the patient is feeling, then you kind of go to pieces.
And in order to not go to pieces, you have to have certain defenses that will help you manage the relation.
That's the interest.
Wants to jump in a reader and not to say quand.
Yes.
Yes, that's right.
So, I get that as a reader, we can feel empathy about a characterization or a book or a screenplay.
I'm wondering, as writers, are you conscious of creating empathy?
Or are you just creating something creative and do you give it any thought in your work?
Well, you know, I'm- I'm- I'm-
...of average intelligence and I- but I know that I can't-
I don't believe that.
I cannot- I cannot create empathy.
I can tell a story.
Whether- whether someone has an empathetic response to that story, I can't control.
In fact, that's the only reason I write is because I cannot control what a story does when I release it.
And it's instructive to me.
And- and some of the response to the work allows me to understand my own empathetic feelings about the work.
So it's- so not only is- is any novel a work in progress always, I- I say that it's- so am I the writer in relation to that work?
But as a writer and as a good writer, you know consciously or unconsciously that this detail that you will add will do something,
you call it empathy or whatever, but it will create a different response in the reader.
That is to say, when- when Dante has himself as a pilgrim trip on the stone, or when Pinocchio realizes that his father, his soul,
his shirt to buy- his coat to buy him a schoolbook, that detail does more than advance the plot.
Let's say you're talking about my entity toward the reader.
No, creating empathy in the reader. That is to say, by putting that detail in, if you are a good writer, you know that the reader at this point will shed it here.
I think that's- I think that's more confident, like you were saying, that's my ability to feel empathy toward the reader and to get at the reader.
And not necessarily my empathy or some of the feelings toward my character.
Oh yes, yes.
So it's at that?
Yeah.
And that's more technical.
Technical, mechanical, and I run from it like crazy.
Because- Oh, that's just- Yes, but because in all, in that way, as writers, we are manipulating a story, but also, as I said before,
every reader is different, and to address my understanding of my empathetic feelings toward one reader is to maybe miss everyone else.
Yeah. So yes, on a very, very rudimentary level, that has to be present.
But- But you have to know how to balance it. Oscar Wilde said that you have to have a heart of stone, not to laugh at the death of little nails.
Well, yes. Well, it's- it's-
Writing is full of contradictions. You have to write what's inside you, but you have to keep it at arm's length so that it doesn't become you.
Yeah, and- and that's difficult, and that- and that happens.
Well, sometimes it happens.
But if the stars are kind yet.
Yes, it's a social justice warrior who believes that human beings live by heuristic rule of thumbs, and we live by stories,
and we don't make rational decisions, we make emotional decisions.
And as- as the human race is heading off the cliff, and you people as writers want to change the direction of humanity, tell them new stories.
And these tools of empathy and so forth, and what are your thoughts in terms of-
How do you reach people who have kind of set in their ways about what they believe the world is?
Can you use these tools to actually change people's minds?
You know, as I heard you think, I remember earlier you-
Percile, you said you had five or six readers. There's a famous Italian writer Alessandro Manzoni who said,
but anyway, Manzoni wrote this essay once where someone criticized writers of doing something.
They said only writers of genius should use this device, and Manzoni said,
is someone really going to stop themselves and say, am I, or am I not a genius?
And that question sort of reminds me of that a little bit in that, you know, I don't know if a writer can really ask him or herself
how I'm going to shape the world, you know, that they're trying so hard just to get the story right.
They're trying to kind of tell it in a convincing way to try and use language in a certain way.
That layer of instrumentality, in my experience, my small experience has never really entered into the equation.
When we're turning it around, because I don't think writers can know whether, you know, everyone wants to ask someone,
and we'll come up and say something about this really had a big, made a big impression on me or whatever.
But if we turn around and think about the books that have changed us, right,
that have reoriented in some important way, our vision of the world.
So that, certainly it's happened to me, I think it's probably happened to everyone.
If you had to choose one, which would it be?
Oh God, you know, well, it's funny because you mentioned little no.
There are two that I read when I was 13, David Carperfield, and Wuthering Heights that scared the life out of me,
because you know, it was completely amoral.
So, to the amoral point, because you mentioned your social justice warrior,
and I think that's, you know, beautifully put, I guess what I would say is, you know,
I think of Sartre at the end of his life where he had dedicated his life to social justice warrioring,
and he was all about engaged literature, but he ended his life obsessed with Bloebare,
and he would repeat passages of Madame Bowery, and he wrote this biography, the
idea of his family, where, you know, making fun really of Baudelaire's, there's not
Baudelaire, Bloebare's lack of social engagement, but to me that's the space that literature also has a social thrust.
It's not necessarily in engaging sociopolitical issues, but in changing the lives of readers in this dimension that is both in
and of, not of this world. In other words, that if we instrumentalize, if we peg literature too much to
sociopolitical theme, we lose that space of the Baudelaire's, of the Wuthering Heights that are, you know,
that they can change people in a different way.
There are two novels that come to mind, Richard Powers, decided to write about climate change by writing fiction and the overstory.
And here's a 700-page novel on the destruction of the forests, and I cannot tell you how many people I know who have read that.
And Amitof Ghosh does the same thing. He writes about climate change through his novels, whether it was the glass palace or now the gun
warrior, I think, was his last one.
You know, so I think there is a way in which you get into people who will pay attention if you put persons into the tail,
that they wouldn't necessarily read nonfiction on that.
So I'm sorry.
Well, that's okay. I was also going to say that there is an important distinction between instruction and just exhibiting complexity,
exhibiting ambiguity, which is obviously important in fiction.
Thank you. Thank you for a very evocative discussion.
This is a follow-up question about obsession.
Yesterday, many of us spent several hours watching television.
It's also a follow-up on television.
Now, a young woman sat there, young by my staff, and aroused many different emotions.
She was both attacked and praised for 30 years of work.
She described a situation where she was sacked in a fairly public way a couple of months ago.
Did that arouse empathy? Did that arouse sympathy? What did that arouse? And what are we going to do about it?
Depends on who you are.
Yes, if you watch, it's that science fiction channel, Fox News.
Then you dismiss this obviously intelligent and engaged person and don't venture toward anything like empathy,
because one, you may not be capable of it. And two, it raises too many questions that you're not capable of answering.
Sadly, you can't argue with people who won't look, and that's where we stand.
That reminds me of the earlier point where I said my sense was that people are reading less today.
This is kind of part of a larger crisis about our social-related literature.
And the consensus in the group seemed to be the opposite, that this is kind of a constant that readers are always a kind of self-selecting minority.
And yet, I also think that if we look at history, there are periods of cultural decline.
In other words, it's very hard, as they say, to catch a falling knife and know exactly where one stands.
But I also think it's dangerous to have a neutral attitude that this is just the way of the world.
Perhaps our weakening engagement with literature is part of a general lowering of public discourse,
and that there is a connection between the two. That's sort of my stance on it, where it's impossible to pretend we don't live in an age
where false narratives are prevalent.
I always tell my students, fake news is the opposite of literature.
Literature tells you it's make-believe, and it sort of brings you to the truth,
whereas fake news pretends it's real and is just trying to manipulate you.
And so, I guess I'm less likely to kind of see this as just business as usual.
I do think there is a connection between.
I think there is a side that's business as usual, because readers have always been a minority,
and choose in between the circus and a reading of poetry.
Most of the Romans went to the circus.
But what is constant and has to remain constant as well is the fight for culture,
for those better people that Whitman wanted.
And the fact that the decline is constant or steady doesn't mean that we should give up.
In Atwood's The Testaments, the character of Aunt Lydia, is exactly the danger with which we are faced.
The woman who has been fighting for her rights, for women's rights, for what she feels is just.
And at a certain point feels that the social pressure is so great that she just gives in
and becomes part of the enemy.
That's the danger.
I just want to bring the other side as literature can be propaganda too.
That's where I came from. Literature doesn't always do good things.
Literature.
But is it literature at that point?
In other words, for example, think of great...
I think there are caught literature, right?
These are books.
You read these books that way too.
Actually, I think these books probably have more harm than goods to communist countries, right?
But are we so arrogant to say they're not literature?
Because there are some who were good.
I mean, we were in Maya or less than San Argentina.
We were flooded with these bad translations of Russian novels.
And some were very good.
Thus was Iron Forged and the flowing of the dawn and so on.
Yeah.
And so...
Did you ever read cement?
No.
No.
No, I don't recommend it.
It sounds like a junk-
When we read our history and depth, maybe things aren't worse than they ever were.
But they feel like it because we are experiencing it now.
But some things are really different.
I don't know if a sound bite is better than real thinking.
I suspect that it is.
That a sound bite is not as good as real thinking.
But I give my students or I challenge them to go watch one of our debates and then go read the
Douglas Lincoln debates and tell me how they are alike.
That's right.
I agree.
I think.
Okay.
I was just going to bring up something of this point because I'm in the art world.
And there was a time when after the abstract expressionist, the pop art came out and then
there was the philosophy of that art in life for one.
And it began to undermine a certain zeitgeist came out.
And also the thought of the continual present rather than the arrested time in the past.
And so not today.
I see so many people.
There are so many stories of fake news, news, autobiographies, confessions that they feel
literature is all around them.
So I just wondered how some of you felt with this onrush.
I know in the art world we suffer also from something of that.
Art has been categorized into political and feminist and all kinds of categories that really
come from the media in the news world rather than the assimilation in time of interior
experience.
And so I'm just curious to know how you feel about this continual storytelling of the media
and everywhere in terms of the fiction world, which I think is and does have some problems.
I think that in the countries that are less advanced with media, you're getting some interesting
stories.
I mean, there are things coming out sometimes from Afghanistan or other places where it's
still a bardic tradition.
No, I think this is a very good point.
And we were really talking about it earlier about, you know, fictions, and this is here
too.
This is not just propaganda, various kinds, but fictions that reassure the reader,
with conventions that they already know, right?
Movies are like this all the time.
You watch a movie.
So what is that giving to the viewer or to the reader?
It's giving what's already known.
So it's a kind of repetition, which then I think is not terribly helpful.
It's because it's hard.
That's hardly new.
It's not a donut.
Art is always complex art and art that presents problems.
It's always played second fiddle too.
Folk music.
But the thing becomes, but it brings people to art.
I don't really like television shows, but it would be great if on a television show we had
an art hero who wasn't a superhero, but a thinking hero.
And maybe as an artist, it's a failure of mine that I haven't tried to produce one.
But it's always the case that we will be fighting against the easier things to consume.
And I consume them too.
I think maybe just as individual, we just have to push back a little.
I just have to use this example because I wrote the novel where a mother had a conversation
with a son who committed suicide and died so they talked across the border between death
and life.
And my publisher said, can we publish as a memoir?
Because it's more attractive in a way.
It is more.
I said, well, nothing.
It came from my life and nothing in this book happened in real life.
I could not talk to a dead son, but that's what it looks like.
What's the easiest way to?
So, Chris, when mass literacy came about, I mean, you're absolutely right.
What was really hot?
Translations of anti-clerical French pornography into English.
They sold like hotcakes, right?
So, nuns having sex and, you know, that was really big hot stuff.
And when you look at the numbers, what middle march, for example, sold, it's not that many.
It was a big success.
So, you're absolutely right that there's a minority of what we like to hear, think of
as serious readers.
But I think that minority is essential.
I guess I hold on to the idea of literature as a category.
It's the books that are culture values over time, separate from all this, the noise that's swirling around.
If you think of a book like Brave New World by Aldous Huxley, right, where everyone's happy, it's a dystopia.
They're doing drugs, having sex, and there's something banned.
Books are banned, right?
That's the world leaders don't want people reading books.
They don't want them, they see it as a threat.
And I really think that-
You said this as melancholy making.
That it leads to complex emotions, at least to complex thought.
And I think there is a connection between, in a really profound way, between great literature and a sense of freedom.
Yeah, that's your last question.
I wonder if we could go back to the beginning.
I do have a question, but I want to make a suggestion about the question.
The question is going to be whether the panelists would agree or disagree, and if disagree why, with the following distinction,
which is that empathy may have more to do with imagination than sympathy does.
And I would think of empathy as primarily the ability to imagine the feelings of another,
which is less viscerally involving than sympathy and therefore more constructive in some situations.
And if we do think of it that way, might it explain some of these issues that we're struggling with,
such as the wish for, or the way people are drawn to emotional engagement in soundbites and tweets and so on,
with a diminution of the ability to imagine something different and other.
Also might it contribute to the differences between men and women in terms of responses to fiction, where many times men who are very comfortable
with not being stereotypically male are nevertheless less interested in fiction,
and might that have something to do with differences in comfort with imagining?
Well, again, it's like what, so the roots of the word imagination come from image,
and so that would go back to a form of mental imagery, I think, if you want to take the roots.
So to imagine probably is reliant also on memory, another form of mental imagery, right?
You can't really imagine unless you've experienced something and you have mental imagery to use.
So then the question is imagination, a cognitive function with emotion attached?
There are probably unconscious forms of imagination.
You know how Manfon Helen Holz talked about unconscious inference as part of a way to predict what's going to happen.
I'm just throwing out a few things. I don't have the whole answer.
Is imagination more about this kind of cognitive function or?
Well, I've removed the word image only because so much of it is language,
and I don't, I mean I suppose we could continue to use it,
but somehow that privileging of sight seems to disregard the fact that we don't think without language.
Well, once we reach the mirror stage.
But that, you know, I'm interested in this thing about what you said about,
and I've seen it myself in bookstores, people, more women reading,
and I also see that at stables I ride, and it's always girls.
Yeah, yeah.
At the stables. I don't see any boys.
But it's, in my personal life, I don't encounter those differences.
And so it's interesting for me to hear them, and when I imagine what you're saying,
then I'm calling on stereotypic images of the culture that allow me to understand it,
and I'm not quite comfortable with that. I don't know what it means.
You wrote a book called Dictionary of Imaginary Places.
Yes, but that was imaginary geography.
The utopia is that we try to imagine and never work.
Like Cleveland.
Exactly.
This is about, this isn't really a question, but it is.
So in my world, I'm an actor.
So actors have to use imagination all the time.
But the imagination comes from words.
So if I play Lady Macbeth, which I have, I'm not, I haven't experienced murder.
I've never murdered anyone.
If I'm doing Tracy Letts August Just Age County,
then I have to know this woman who has drugged out of her mind alcoholic with her children,
who she's destroying, but she loves and doesn't want to lose.
So there is within us, I believe,
we are born with or without empathy, and it would be very difficult to be an actor
if one didn't have, it wasn't born with empathy,
because you wouldn't know how to get your imagination to work with the words.
I mean, you have Shakespeare, so he's given you that, and when he wrote,
he certainly wrote a tragedy or a comedy.
And the universe out of he is because he is able to make us think things
that we have all felt somewhere in our lives, and that's why his plays have endured.
But it isn't really a question of words or imagination or sympathy or empathy,
it's that it's a marriage of all of those things coming together.
And also the experience of living, raising a child, losing a child,
a child not speaking to you for years, and you don't know how to get back
and ask for forgiveness, you don't know how to, you know,
we don't know how to talk to each other.
So we read and we have brilliant people like yourselves helping us,
and then when you go to the theater, we read a great book,
and I hope part of what we do is that it does change us.
But to me, it's all, it's a filigree.
Great.
Thank you.
So thank you so much.
You were also compelling.
You had to stay here willingly and happily and gladly and gratefully for the whole afternoon.
So thank you for really a brilliant conversation.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
