We're going to get started.
Good afternoon, everybody.
Welcome to the Helix Center.
Before I introduce today's participants, let me tell you about a couple of round tables
that are coming up.
On Saturday, March 12, the meditative state, with research psychologist Sarah Lazar, Peter
Melanowski, and Yi Yang Tang, and pastoral care leader, Koshan Paley Ellison, and psychoanalyst
Morgan Stevens.
And on Saturday, March 26, understanding genius part two women, with historians Joyce Chaplin,
Kathleen Keat, and Darren McMahon, anthropologist Susan Seymour, and poet and visual artist,
Ann Marie Levine, who as Helix executive committee member also organized that round table.
Now for today, jeans, computers, and medicine, James Domen, assistant professor of biomedical
engineering at Georgia Tech.
Frances Lee, Mortimer D. Sackler professor and vice chair for research department of psychiatry
at Wile Cornell Medical College.
Karen Mashke, research scholar at the Hastings Center, and Hans Guido Wendell, principal
investigator at the cancer genetics laboratory at Memorial Sloan Kettering.
Okay, we'll begin.
So what's the latest in genetics?
Well, I'm really pleased that you started off with a question I could answer quickly.
So from my perspective as somebody who does genetic therapies, who looks into the future
and sees medicines where we target the genome, I think there's a revolution occurring in
biology where with different types of new small molecules or, excuse me, DNAs or RNAs,
we can actually go for the first time and effectively manipulate the genome the way that
we would like to.
So in genetics, one of the many revolutions is this ability to actually go in and edit
the genome as we would like or manipulate the genome and see what that can do therapeutically
and scientifically.
That's one of the advances in genetics, I would say.
If you were to take a guess, where would be the first clinical application of this type
of new wave of gene editing?
It's a difficult question.
I guess I'd answer it by outlining sort of one of the biggest hurdles to implementing
the gene editing therapies, which is the ability to safely deliver the new genetic drugs where
you want to deliver them.
As you might imagine, if you're going to go in and create a targeted therapy, you want
to make sure it's going to the right spot in the body.
For that reason, I would venture a guess and say that anywhere where you can administer
the genetic medicine locally, so for instance, your eye, you can literally spray it into
your eye.
You can take cells out of the body like your immune cells and edit them and then put them
back in.
So immune cells and then perhaps also deliver, which is an organ that is a little easier
to target drugs to than other organs.
So just as since I'm sort of a layman of this gene editing, so what's the difference between
this and the revolution I had recalled in the 1990s with gene therapy?
Yeah, so again, it's tricky.
The revolution in gene therapy is really actually bearing some interesting therapeutic fruit
right now.
So again, back in the 90s, there were these advances where people started saying, all
right, we're going to actually start taking patients where they're not able to produce
a particular gene.
And then we're going to put that gene into patients and cure the patient in some way,
shape or form.
And unfortunately, in sort of the late 90s and early 2000s, there were a few hurdles
and events that set the field back.
But now because the delivery of some of these genetic therapies has become much more safe,
we're seeing a change and we're actually seeing really impressive clinical data come
out with gene therapies that were originally thought of in the 80s and 90s.
So an interject, because one of the step-backs was actually a death.
Yeah, that's right.
That had to do with research ethics issues.
And with possibly one exception, there's no FDA-approved gene therapy at this time.
There's maybe more than one.
Yeah, one year up, there it is.
Yeah, but in the United States as a yet, so I'm not, I'm just sort of, as a part of the
revolutionary language.
Yeah, of course.
The revolution hasn't happened yet and there was a lot of hype.
That's right.
Some people wonder if there's the same kind of hype with gene editing, you know, with,
and also potential harms because of the exuberance that people are going into with this the same
way they did with gene therapies.
Yeah.
Not to put you on the spot because you're not the only person.
Yeah, of course.
And I should clarify that when I say, you know, revolution, I'm not specifically only
referring to gene editing technologies.
I'm also referring to anti-sense technologies and RNAi, which, you know, small, interfering
sirna, or excuse me, small interfering RNAs or sirna.
So you know, I do think that there is a risk for overhyping new technologies, just like
with any other technology that has ever been, you know, reported.
But I think generally speaking, it is a relatively safe statement to make when we say that maybe
20 years, different classes of medicine based on either small RNAs or anti-sense will have
a much larger impact in the clinic than certainly they will now.
So, and I think that's primarily because the delivery is going to continue to improve.
So to the clinicians, are you seeing that in the clinical world?
But you see this in your path?
I have not seen a patient in 15 years.
I'm calling myself a clinician anymore.
I'm my only patient if I have a fever that's about it.
I don't know.
I think much of the technology is a long way to go before it's a clinical reality.
So no doubt it's cool new research tools that we can use to learn a lot about how cells
work, how cell biology works and what genes do and what happens if you change them and
so on.
I think the practical applications are very limited right at the moment.
You can maybe the most promising he mentioned is that you can isolate immune cells, pull
them out of your body, modify them and put them back and suddenly these cells have learned
to target a leukemia and that works sometimes right.
It's not risk free but if you don't have a choice then at the moment hey there's a
new thing on the horizon right.
So that's a reality.
If you open a newspaper you're going to find much more speculative things of how we're
going to engineer you know new super athletes or we'll make you know smarter children.
But all these things I think are not a reality and I mean but obviously if you think that
it might be then that has a lot of ethical implications that you have to think about.
I'm going to hold this because I'm having problems with that.
Well one of the things I wanted to point out and the reason for raising that question is
a lot of the science that does get hyped in the media is really what we might call discovery
science.
I mean you're in the lab and you're building a body of work and you're training a body
of scientists to continue to build on that work and science is a very incremental process
which often is two steps forward eight steps back and maybe even more than eight steps
back and cleaning up mistakes and errors and over sites and just not even thinking about
certain things that you thought might happen or didn't happen.
And yet in the media when we talk about technologies and we hear all these issues about brand technologies
and computer interfaces and therapy, gene splicing, gene editing, there's an intermediate point
and that's where I sit which is the research ethics point.
You don't just come up with a discovery in the lab and then say let's take it across
the street over to Well Cornale or to take it over to Slunk Hetteran and let's use it.
There's another whole step that can take anywhere from 10 to 15, 20, 30, 40 years.
When you were speaking I was just thinking about a month ago there was this amazing
article that was in both Washington Post and New York Times that we had now made a quantum
leap in our understanding of schizophrenia.
They had been able to find an immune gene, an MHC gene that was one of the largest hits
in the genome wide association studies.
And as you read the article you just were and it was elegant.
The genetics were elegant, the mouse model that they were, they found a compliment gene
that was somehow related to this that would actually prune spines and neurons.
And then ultimately when you read the fine print they said that this gene, this MHC complex
gene, possibly explains 0.25% of the risk factor for schizophrenia.
So that from a clinical point of view it has almost no worth.
It would possibly help us understand something about the pathophysiology for that 0.25% of
people on the planet earth who have this genetic variation.
But for the rest of the people it would have no effect.
So the way I think about it is that in terms of the genetic revolution, I think of it in
terms of either diagnosis, pathophysiology or some type of intermediate phenotype that
we could use to possibly understand things.
And I would put this in the pathophysiology that we could study, as you said, it's a discovery
science that possibly that there is some neuroimmune component to schizophrenia in 0.2% of the
population that increases your risk by 0.25%.
But by itself would not cause schizophrenia by no means at all.
And I think this is the kind of things that the media does, which actually does a disservice
to our field because psychiatry in particular has had many false starts.
I was at a talk recently where the Nobel Prize was given for frontal lobotomies and it's
absolutely clear that we do not understand many things and that when these types of articles
come out they actually, now people think that we're probably, as you said, one step closer
to probably eight steps back in terms of understanding this.
And that makes me wonder, so from the bioethics perspective, this is something I think that
many fields struggle with, how do you present your science to the public and how do you
tone down some of the popular press reports?
So when you guys look at the bioethics, do you guys ever consider questions like these?
Yes, it's been written about a lot.
And unfortunately, when I'm at sessions having these conversations, the scientists end up
being in the hot seat because we're asking you, well, is this really going to happen
in 10 years or 15 years.
Part of it's a media problem and part of it is also, I think, the nature of our culture
that institutions are in a position of competing because they want the best and the brightest
and they want the NIH money and they want the venture capital money and they want the
patents and they want, you know, and so they're part of the mix of promoting, I wouldn't say
hype, but promoting their work and their people.
And the media then takes those stories and translates it in ways and then you see movies
like The Matrix and you see other movies where this gets put into the popular culture in
ways that the, you know, the scientists and his or her team who are working in the lab
day after day, after day, you know, you know, wonder.
And yet in the popular discourse, we have these conversations about different human
brains, different human organs.
We can fix them in the lab.
We can do petri dish organs and put them in humans and they'll live forever and it's
not really close to reality.
Yet it becomes a part of the public discourse and then it becomes a part of the public fear
too, which can often hinder science going forward.
Yeah, I would also contend that it does a disservice because it sets expectations, you
know, pretty high.
And as you said, I think it's a really nice way of stating it science is really two steps
forward and eight steps backwards.
I mean, it takes a lot of effort to make even an incremental change.
And I think when we, you know, you read a popular press report about, you know, we're
going to create a new organ and, you know, now you're going to be able to have new kidneys
and new lungs and new whatever all the time.
I think if that's what's sort of understood in the popular media, that's what people are
going to read and that's how they're going to think about science and that, as you said,
that's not at all how it works.
It takes a really long time and there are a lot of failures before you get any kind of
even mild success.
Yeah, okay.
So when you have a hypothesis that you have verified, like a gene editing, that has been
done.
So what causes the eight steps back?
If you know how to do the gene editing and you know what to apply it to.
And I think what Giro was saying, you can modify the immune system of the person.
So what causes the steps back?
I don't know.
I'd defer to the people closer to the clinic than I am on that.
I would defer to, I think the sex stories have mainly been in cancer.
So I would ask you, like, what would you think would be?
Because this is where you actually do have genetic biomarkers that inform diagnosis and
treatment.
The success stories.
Yeah, no, there are plenty.
And I think it's not just therapeutics, and it's not just gene editing and it's not science
fiction.
There's real life things that have improved light years since I've treated my last patient.
Now if you come to a major cancer center, your cancer is going to be sequenced.
The whole genome of the thing.
Previously, we didn't have that.
Now you can sequence the whole thing.
You can find what is the mutation that drives this disease.
And there's a chance you might have a drug specifically for that mutation.
For some patients that benefit directly from this, that's a major breakthrough.
Right suddenly you don't get, you know, the standard therapy, but you get something that
is essentially tailor-made for your disease.
I think that's where we are now, and probably with new drugs and we will go further.
Right?
So I think there is a real breakthrough here that now we can sequence a whole tumor.
Now previously, how did you diagnose a tumor?
You look at it under a microscope and you say, well, this kind of looks like, you know,
figure 7B in the textbook, and therefore it has to be that tumor, and we usually treat
them with drug B, and that kind of works.
And now you have the whole genome, and you can find specific sensitive.
So on the diagnostic side, I think there's like a real breakthrough.
That's just sequencing, analyzing, being able to do this, which maybe 20 years ago was
like flying to the moon, it was impossible.
You couldn't do it.
You would count individual nucleotides.
Now you sequence everything.
So that's a major break.
And I think for us as a research group, the next major advances that we can use these
genetic tools like CRISPR, like gene editing, and RNA, RNA interference, and so on, as research
tools to ask in a leukemia or in a cancer, what would happen if we take away any of the
genes in this cancer?
Which ones can't they tolerate to lose?
What are they really sensitive to?
And what are these things maybe already?
Something that we can target with a drug that we have today?
Or maybe tell the pharmaceutical company and say, look, we keep finding this gene and we
think that these liver cancers, they really need this gene.
Can you help us make a drug?
And I think that's sort of the next research level that these technologies are practically
immediately useful for.
I think those for me are the biggest sort of advances that we have there.
Now along those lines, I'm stepping outside my field of expertise here a little bit because
I do therapeutics, but one of the things that's most interesting to me is using this idea
of genomics and looking for mutations early on in a patient sample because I know that
at least my understanding is that in the clinic, especially with cancer, one of the
biggest limitations is being able to find out that you have the disease early.
And if you catch it early, then you have a much better shot of surviving or being treated
successfully.
So is it true or is it realistic that, again, not to put everybody on the spot, but in a
reasonable amount of time that we'll have technologies available where you can, when
you get your annual checkup, you can take a blood sample and say, oh, there's something
going on here.
This looks kind of wonky and we need to take in to give a CT scan and look for early signs
that way using genetics.
Yeah, so that's a difficult, I have an echo, right?
I think that's very attractive, right?
Being able to pull blood and say, well, we're going to find a specific marker or a specific
cell that has a specific mutation and therefore we know that you have pancreatic cancer.
That has a lot of difficulties to this and they're not just technical.
So technically it's all possible.
You can pull blood and you can sequence it and you can analyze and you can find things.
But I think they're practical issues here.
So let's say you find a mutation in your blood, a translocation, T1480 and it occurs in lymphomas.
Well it turns out 50% of healthy people, you can find it.
So what are you going to do with that?
I mean, take 50% of the population and roll them through a CAT scan and nobody's going
to pay for that.
It's impossible, right?
So there isn't the level of specificity to it yet that you can say, well, we really
have the tools to do it.
I think many of these diagnostic tests, they're very useful in following up.
So you have diagnosed someone with a cancer and you treat it and you know this marker
was at a certain level and you get treated and it disappears.
You know, you did the right thing.
If it comes back, you know, where we need to have another look.
So there are issues about specificity and about the cost associated.
All this was discussed and it's not just even genomics or genetic tools.
All this was discussed with PSA recently, right?
Which I mean, this is a marker that's been around for, I don't know, 30, 40, 50 years.
It's a protein marker you can measure in the blood and it indicates whether your prostate
is happy or not happy basically.
It also goes very high in prostate cancer.
But if you just screen the population for high levels of PSA, you're going to end up
doing a lot of biopsies and not everyone likes to have a needle stuck in their prostate
and it does cost a lot of money.
So there are practical problems of following through with these tests.
So yeah, I'll go ahead.
I'm also stepping out of my comfort area, but one of my colleagues is a geneticist and
he said that what he's now working on, he said, he's at Hudson Alpha in Alabama, is
that so what they're doing to study breast cancer, for example, some of the psychiatrists.
So this is obviously outside of it.
Is that they're actually isolating all the immune cells in the blood and they're sequencing
them because obviously your immune profile by genetics is different because you're generating
different antibodies.
And they'll notice that they get a completely different profile.
It's not a single gene.
It's just a different genetic profile biometratically.
And then after treatment, your immune system looks different on this genetic profile.
Was he just making this up or have you heard of this?
I was just having a bit of it.
I had a similar idea a while ago.
I thought, you know, this would be fun, fun thing to do with people who are exposed to
a lot of pathogens.
So you know, bacteria or something.
So you just take everyone who takes the subway in New York and compare them to people who
don't take the subway.
You're going to get a completely different representation of the immune system, right?
Again, I don't know how specific this is.
I'm not familiar with the specific research he's doing.
Maybe.
Your comment was what I was going to actually, it was a good comment because that's what
I was going to say over here was.
Again, I'm an enthusiastic skeptic or a skeptical enthusiastic.
Biomarkers are one whole category of skepticism in some ways.
And if we just look at genetics and look at a genetic biomarker and take out the environment
and the exposures of people and the epigenetic issues, we may not have the whole story.
So there's this much more complex picture that we don't hear about in the media and that
we don't even hear about in cancer genomics, which is absolutely right, it's had phenomenal
improvements and spectacular advances in terms of being able to sequence a cancer genome.
On the other hand, you have a vast amount of information that physicians and geneticists
know nothing about.
And I really understand how they interact with each other.
They don't understand how environmental factors interact.
And even within categories of ancestry, age, when the disease was actually caught in that
sense, there are a lot of factors that don't necessarily mean there's going to be a drug
for that specific patient at that specific time or that editing some piece of the genome
is actually going to help and may help that patient but not another one who you would
think looks just like that patient in terms of biophysical characteristics.
So again, it's a lot more complex and my skepticism comes from the precision medicine,
personalized medicine hype in some sense that we're just going to be able to find just
one person, you don't want personalize, you want something that works for everyone.
Exactly.
Who wants personalize, who wants something that works, right?
That was the first cancer war, that it's going to work for everybody.
We're going to find the drug and we're going to use powerful chemo therapeutic drugs for
lots of people and we're going to find the right combination and it's going to work for
everybody.
Well, the other thing I like to point out is when we think about precision medicine or
we think about personalized medicine, I like to sort of split diseases when I think about
them into basically cancer and everything else.
Because when I look at, you know, when I try to design something that will deliver a drug
to a tumor, I get a little nervous because the tumor thinks and will fight back against
whatever you're delivering.
So you'll deliver a drug and if you kill, if you have like the best drug delivering the
world and you have a tumor that for easy numbers has 100 cells in it and you get 99 of those
cells, that one little surviving cell is now smarter and won't respond to that therapy
later on.
I don't know many other diseases that evolve so rapidly in that way.
So a lot of times when we talk about personalized medicine, we automatically sort of default
to cancer and I don't, again, this is outside of my expertise but I'm a little less skeptical
that precision medicine will work for diseases outside of the cancer field.
Maybe we'll get lucky and we'll find something for aethro or we'll get something for some
other ischemic heart disease or something like this, something that isn't, you know,
so aggressively fighting against you.
So I think that's important to note is that, and I actually don't know if that's the case
in neuropsychiatric disease or not because that's complicated for a different reason,
is that what you're just saying?
Yes, it's very complicated.
Well first of all, the brain's very complicated.
You know, but I would have to say what, just in my sort of like last five years of research,
is that what I'd never understood particularly well even though I was trained by Dr. Narsesian
and others in psychiatry, is that almost every psychiatric disorder emerges between the transition
from childhood to adolescence to late adolescence.
So the entire disease progresses and then you live for the rest of your life with this.
So when you actually start treating them, you're actually seeing people that have had
this disease for a while.
And the idea is that we might have had to treat them at that moment when it first started
because the, and it, and what we're now realizing is that the adolescent or child brain is very
different.
So whatever drugs that we now have in our current armamentarian is not really set for
this therapies we have or set for what we are treating.
So it's actually quite a moving target.
You have a disease that began in essentially an immature developing brain and you are treating
it based on a completely different roadmap later on.
So it's very hard to design particular, both behavioral or molecular therapies based on
that.
Ultimately you would want to treat that when your symptoms first emerge but it's very
difficult to, it's very difficult to do clinical trials in children and adolescents which is
probably when what we'll ultimately find, if I had to make a prediction 20 years from
now we realize that we'll have to, that's when you treat it.
Because ultimately 10 year, if you go to disease like chronic disease go on for 10 years,
it's just not going to be hard.
I think that's sort of the lesson we're learning in the field of Alzheimer's disease that actually
you need to actually treat them when they first have their cognitive impairments emerging
and the reason why almost every clinical trial has failed is because they're treating them
at age of 60 and above.
Let me ask in your field.
It's a kind of genetic research.
Come up with new targets, new ways of treating.
I mean for cancers I think being put a finger on a few things that we have new drugs and
we know they target certain mutations and that's how they work.
And psychiatry and neurological diseases has there been...
Well first of all I would say that there's been a great revolution in studying the fact
that both autism and schizophrenia, there's been massive advances in genome sequencing
and for example the study of the MHC gene was based on the capacity of large consortiums
to get essentially over 100,000 schizophrenic patients entire genome sequence and there you
can then get genome wide significant hits.
The problem that they ultimately found was that it explains so little of the vary.
Each of these genes don't explain much.
What's most befuddling for autism is that after 10 years what they realized is that almost
every mutation in autism is essentially rare.
And what they said in the last five years what they realized is the word rare actually
means rare.
So that ultimately there's not going to be a common biomarker or diagnostic tool and
every autism spectrum disorder patient is going to probably be unique because it's sort of
these spontaneous deletions and mutations and in that sense that for that one patient
if they found one interesting gene that will help that one patient but that's about it.
The hope is that in the future that there will be common mutation variants that have
been found that can be used because the genome is filled with people that have these genetic
variants in these special plasticity genes that my lab actually studies and the idea
is that we could use this to at least guide something.
It's still very early days of whether or not this will happen but that's the idea that
there would be some common genetic variation that could be used to at least but the bar
is so low inside.
But you think of these are mutations that you think of as inherited so that it's in
every cell in your body basically.
So I think it's very different from the idea we think about cancers arising where you know
most cancer genes are normal in every other cell but we think really there's mutations
that occur in one cell somewhere that triggers a cascade of further changes that ultimately
lead to the tumor.
But I think in your field you think of the genetics as a predisposing thing that will
make you more sensitive to environment, to stresses, to early life's traumas or something.
Right, whatever that actually is.
So you probably don't think of it then as much as a genetic disease.
I mean we think of cancer as a genetic disease.
Basically there is a cell that gets irradiated, something goes wrong and then the things happen.
But to what extent do you think psychiatric diseases are genetic?
They have to be genetic because this is just an example because my lab also studies obsessive
compulsive disorder.
If you have an identical twin there's a 65% chance that identical twin will have obsessive
compulsive disorder.
So something is definitely being transmitted and the same with schizophrenia is almost
that hot or bipolar disorder.
So these are incredibly heritable disorders and what the field has been dealing with is
what we call the missing heritability.
There's something massive, some large elephant we're missing.
And you can imagine.
What do you mean by missing?
What is missing here?
Because not all the genome wide association studies have not found a gene that can be
transmitted that is in identical twins even.
People are very smart now.
They're doing twin studies and family based studies with large pedigrees to try to find
even sort of rare genetic and they've not been able to find.
There have been so many false starts.
That's what I'm being very...
They thought they found some before.
They named them schizophrenia genes and now they're sort of discredited.
So how does the field reconcile?
Because that's...
How does the field reconcile that?
Because you might say, okay, well then we're just going to sequence more people to which
the kind of argument could be made.
Well, if it's really that ubiquitous then you shouldn't have to sequence very many people
at all.
You should be able to pick it up.
Well, it's going to be something new.
It's the three dimensional structure of the genome which we don't know how to characterize
or some other sort of currently black box mechanism.
No, I think the...
At least in the neuropsychiaty field we've come to terms with the fact that we actually
don't know how to diagnose our patients very well.
We use a criteria called the Diagnostic Statistical Manual which is essentially a syndromic manual.
There's no quantitative biomarkers.
You have a histology test or you have blood pressure even to measure hypertension.
I was at a wonderful grand rounds at Cornell the other day where Kathleen Merrick-Hang is
a very talented human geneticist.
I had done some...
A very fascinating study.
She took bipolar patients and gave them essentially fit bits and smart watches to walk around.
What she noticed that what every bipolar patient had was not what we think of as a DSM-5,
racing thoughts, whatever, mania or hypomania, she noticed that she could predict when they
would become functionally ill is by the fact that they traveled more within the city or
within their town.
So it was just physical activity that there are certain aspects of the way we diagnose
patients that don't actually capture the disorder.
As an example, another example, if someone is given a diagnosis of major depression, you
can either eat too much, eat too little, sleep too much, sleep too little and actually get
the same disorder.
So essentially you're studying the equivalent of 1940s cough or some bad x-ray, long x-ray.
You're not...
So it's not surprising that all the genome-wide association studies have failed.
I've always advocated that there are certain things in psychiatry which are incredibly
robust.
If you have a panic attack, no one will say there's no...
It looks...
No one will disagree that that was a panic attack or if you wash your hands ten times
a day, no one will disagree that that is a repetitive behavior and if your hands are
chapped, then you know you have a disorder.
So you need to study what we call phenotypic extremes or if you have a disorder of type
of depression where you start hallucinating, you're now studying a very specific type of
depression, a subtype that is extreme in some sense.
And I think that's where the field is moving, that we have failed and this was a sort of
an argument between the head of the APA and the head of NIMH a couple of years ago that
was played out in the New York Times where they disagreed about the...
How to diagnose patients and to my senses that the fact that there is even a discussion
about how we even diagnose our patients tells us that we're still at a very early stage
for this.
But I should not be so negative about psychiatry just because...
I know technology is going to help you there.
I mean it's a new imaging thing is going to help you out of a lot of other medical diagnostics
are based on imaging or measuring activities in your EEGs.
But are those things providing criteria at all or are they?
I would even step back further and just say that the brain is complex.
The model of genetic disorder in the brain is Huntington's disease.
It's autosomal dominant.
You have one copy, you have the disorder and the genetics is just beautiful.
You have 70 repeats, you get different gradations of this phenotype and you now have a genetic
test you have a great MR or whatever cat scanning to basically show you that the brain is shrink...
certain areas of the brain are shrinking and they've known this since the 1980s.
And to this day it is an incurable disorder and the reason only reason why it's decreasing
in prevalence is because the genetic testing will allow people to decide that if you have
the gene you will not have children or something.
So this should have been like the lowest hanging fruit in terms of neurological psychiatric
disorders and they've been trying to put in growth factors into the brain or somehow
because they know exactly what circuit they know that the striatum is degenerating.
So even if you can't repair Huntington the protein you can at least pump it full of whatever
growth factors and that has not actually worked at this point.
Is that where this CRISPR thing should be useful?
So actually I think this proves your point beautifully.
Earlier you said you're very skeptical and that we should tone down at times our exuberance
for these new technologies and I think this is a great demonstration that you're correct.
We've known as you said the genetics on Huntington's have been clear for a very long time since
the original linkage studies and some of Dave Hausmann's work and worked by some really
other great scientists.
It's pretty clear that in theory if you could reduce the CAG repeats in that disease that
you could correct the phenotype and theory and despite that fact my field, this drug
delivery therapeutics field has not successfully been able to deliver a therapeutic that can
do this very simple genetic task despite the fact that we've known exactly what we needed
to do for 30 years.
And also to some extent proves your point when you say the brain is complex.
When I look at the brain from a drug delivery perspective I get extremely nervous because
of that fact it's just a big huge complicated organ and it's hard to get stuff to go to
the brain.
Which is a nice place in the brain.
Yeah I would even argue it's hard to get, I don't want to speak too broadly or too like
an over colloquial terminology here but I think about this very simply which is that there's
this thing that we're all aware of the blood brain barrier which is basically the blood
vessels in the brain are very good at keeping stuff out of the brain generally speaking.
And so if you want to deliver a drug into the brain it's really hard to do it because
the body has evolved and designed itself to prevent things from getting into the brain.
It's quite literally that simple, it's hard to get drugs into the brain so even if we have
clear genetics it's hard to make an impact which again like you said.
Well to second that with the imaging I think the next big hype is going to be the brain
imaging.
The reality is out there you can see things that we could never see before and the absolutely.
But it has a, well it's not a picture that's the other myth, it's not a picture of somebody's
brain it's a composite of a number of statistical and computerized.
Is this like the, half of my eyes.
Oh I think it's not a picture of my brain in the sense that people think of a picture.
So there's already the media, I have this slide in some ways.
But you know I think the next kind of potential hype is going to be brain imaging and Alzheimer's
disease because again there's pretty good information about what's happening.
You can see the same thing happening in Alzheimer's patients and Parkinson's patients.
And yet just because one can actually show that doesn't mean there's going to be some
kind of targeted delivery.
And yet we keep seeing over and over again you know the next, I have articles that said
in ten years we're going to have drugs or Alzheimer's, we had those articles 15 years
ago for gene therapy.
We're going to have gene therapy for these particular disorders in ten years.
It's an ethical problem what you do with, do you want to diagnose early a condition that
you can't do anything about?
Correct.
I mean.
And that's the whole genetics information in terms of the bio banking and the results.
I mean that's what I've been doing for ten years, research results exactly.
That's super interesting right?
This is, I'm so curious to hear your voice for a second on this.
Yeah, we have this wave, I mean total tsunami of genetic information available and it's
frankly difficult to interpret.
Even for somebody who's, you know you have a PhD in genetics you can get spin a tube
and get your 23andMe profile back and it's hard to interpret your own stuff.
So it's going to be difficult and we're going to need scientists and people who are trained
specifically to take all the genetic information and talk to patients in a way that's practical
and I don't know how you do that.
I mean do you guys have any idea how to do that?
Well the field is moving in that direction.
When I started thirteen years ago at the Hastings Center I was on a project, an NIH funded
project on the genetics education and ethics or something to that effect was the title.
And we talked about these issues about, you know the human genome had just started to,
it had just started to produce some data.
So this was in the early 2000s and you know the whole issue was oh my god we have all
this information now and we're going to have all these breakthroughs.
Well then the scientists and the clinicians started saying we have a lot of information
that tells us nothing.
We just have a lot of information.
And even if we have information that shows something that might be close to helping us
on a diagnosis we have no treatments.
And then all the other issues about familial connections and heritability and paternity
issues and all this came up.
The field in medicine and genetics has moved, I would in at least the last five years quite
a bit to trying to find ways for institutions and specialty groups to at least kind of have
some kind of a consensus on what is the key information they want to actually look at
and what do you actually know.
And to try to have that information filtered down to the clinical level as opposed to
everybody just has everything.
So a lot of institutions I'm sure your institution I know at the Mayo Clinic I had done some
work there.
At the larger professional society level there are these groups now these consortia
either regionally, institutionally or across the field of trying to find out you know what
are the key genetic variants that we need to be focused on in terms of clinical practice.
Even if we can't do anything is there enough information about something that we would
want to at least ask patients if they want that information and then try to find some
way to deal with even if you can't do anything with Huntington's at least you know if they
want to know.
Then you come into the ethical issue of what if they don't want to know.
Does a clinician have an obligation?
So you've got the right to know issue and right not to know issue.
Yeah.
It reminds me of the informed consent.
I remember as a medical student I had to consent a teenage year for an appendectomy taking
the appendix out and it was just really difficult to explain to him exactly what it involved
and so on.
This is just an appendix.
Now you talk about risk factors that may by 2% or 5% or 17.3% or to your risk of something
for which you it just very hard to see how you will.
Well if you're educated in the field how will you reach a conclusion how you will how
this affects your treatment and how you then tell this to broader.
It's really critical to take into account how your description you know when that patient
receives that information it could affect their even even if medically their genetic
code isn't going to really change the odds that they get a given disease.
If you say okay you know I'm your risk for disease X has now increased by 15% right as
a patient I might go oh my lord.
This is that's scary to me you know I am at risk for disease X however the overall risk
of any disease is like 1 in 10,000 so now you're like 1.15 out of 10,000 statistically
nothing really has changed.
Correct.
Right and but that's I know that even if I got that information I would be like oh man
this is you know.
Most major diseases though even though they may be genetic components and maybe even the
science might get us to a point where you could be the next Nobel Prize winner for finding
a targeted you know pathway.
Most major diseases we already know if you're at risk for it.
You have family history, you have high blood pressure, you have certain markers in your
blood for diabetes and for prostate cancer, you have scans imaging from mammography,
CAT scans, MRIs.
So the genetic information may not in and of itself change much already and if you're
talking about trying to prevent those diseases we have tons of literature and studies showing
that people are very very very hard to get people to change their eating, exercise, lifestyle
habits even when they have the information that their dad died at 45.
So sometimes I wonder what you know from again from the discovery science point the discovery
science is critically important but from the clinical point what we already know about
patients what we already learn in the clinic you have a lot of information already.
Go into a new doctor and the first thing you do is go down the list what your family history
have you been in the hospital, have you had any operations, have you had a stroke, do
you have diabetes, do you ever get dizzy, do you ever have all these things that you
look at and it's not completely done but it gives you a lot of information already.
Correct, for example one of my colleagues is a stroke specialist and all he says is that
if you control your blood pressure that's probably the best thing to prevent stroke,
Alzheimer's disease, cognitive impairment much more so than much later on and that would
be probably from a public health impact that's probably much more important if you just control
your blood pressure your chances of all these devastating neurologic disorders that decrease
oxygen.
And it would be a lot easier if I can still eat the way I eat and get a gene chip or some
mechanism put into my brain to get your blood pressure checked and decrease salt intake
which is actually what you're supposed to do.
Well and the other thing I'll point out too is that so this is what it looks like right
now but you know things change and it could be in 20 years they play this video back and
everybody on the stage looks like a fool as I would actually statistically this is probably
a good case.
This is why it's always better to keep skeptical stance.
Yeah, that's right.
But you know things I mean things could change it could turn out that the precision medicine
didn't work out as much as we want to or it could turn out that you know we have cures
to three or four diseases that we didn't think were on the table because in eight years
I think that's actually more likely.
Yeah, that's right.
Because the focus is on a siloed science focus and yes absolutely right.
That's right it's just impossible to predict how these things evolve.
They're in the business of what discovery.
That's right.
One of the areas that was promising for the gene editing were the kind of diseases that
we know are inherited and we know that start early like muscular dystrophy for example.
More sickle salinine.
More sickle salinine.
I thought those are areas where the promise was the greatest.
Oh yeah that's right.
So there are a number of disease and I'm not an expert in this because we just work on
the delivery.
But there are a subset of biological diseases where again sort of akin to Huntington's
where the genetics and the biology is pretty clear.
As a broad statement we all know here that most diseases are very complicated biologically
but there are subset diseases where we know okay roughly you know this gene is messed
up and therefore you get the disease or that gene is messed up and therefore you get the
disease.
So for disease like that I do think there's a possibility that we'll see advances before.
This is definitely a safe statement to make.
We'll see famous lawswords.
I do think that we'll see advances in the simple diseases before we'll see advances
in the complicated diseases.
And I do think that's the case.
I was going to ask you don't these current ways of working with genes allow you to alter
the brain blood barrier at the brain, in other words isn't that part of the job to see how
you can alter that barrier.
So it kind of depends.
Alter can be a scary word in the brain and I guess the best way to describe it is there's
a reason why that blood barrier is there.
And so for instance let's say theoretically you said okay I want to deliver drugs to the
brain so we know that there is a gene.
So the blood vessels that line the brain all express this one particular gene called
VE kit here and the VE kit here basically takes the cells that line up the brain and
it makes the cells stick together so that there's a tight junction nothing can get in
between the cells.
So in theory you know you go in and inject an antibody towards VE kit here and direct
to SIR and A against VE kit here and knock down that protein so the cells become loosened
up and now you can deliver your drug and it would get out.
However they're going to be side effects to that and they could be pretty dramatic side
effects.
So I think manipulating the brain in order to get drugs to it is in theory a workable
strategy been practiced I would you know if I had to put money on the table I'd probably
bet against it.
Because you get to modify the drugs so they will go up and the other way around.
You can change the pharmacology of molecules so that they do go to the brain.
Yeah.
And there's a lot of utility in understanding some basic biology so you know there's a
there are certain they're very limited number but there are a small number of pathways where
you can actually these molecular pathways the cells use these pathways to get things
across the bloodstream into the brain because the brain does need to get stuff out of the
bloodstream so the body has ways to get certain things into the brain and you can hijack
some of these molecular pathways to get things across the brain.
Now the efficacy is can be limited but there are a small number of pathways where you can
exploit them to get things across.
There's a lot of things to the brain.
I would have to say one of the miracles of modern psychiatry or of psychiatry in the
20th to 20th century is that we actually were serendipitously able to find prozac and
halloparadol and lithium which are now sort of like everything is a mainstay of that but
if we and they get across very well and it's amazing because these actually change the
practice of psychiatry and if we did not have this we would not be in the state we are now
where it's so these definitely went across the board and they're actually quite effective
so it's not as if this is we're dealing with something that is 50 to 60% effective in most
people what we have the main issue that we're sort of grappling with now is what do we do
for the 40 to 50% of people that don't respond to the third and fourth generation of prozac
or the third and fourth generation of lithium at this point but it is quite miraculous that
we have these.
And it's also important to note here too that when you think about getting things across
or across the blood brain barrier into the brain there's a size limitation so the things
that get across to the things that cells can handle and sort of take across on their own
are typically extremely small so they might be on the order of like a chemical chemical
compound that might weigh 500 Dalton's or maybe a thousand Dalton's at most.
A lot of these biological drugs that we're talking about these sort of next generation
drugs if you put them inside a nanoparticle people don't know how to weigh a nanoparticle
but I've heard estimates on the order of 20 million to 100 million Dalton's which is certainly
a lot different than 500 Dalton's and so getting that delivery of these large biologics across
is going to be a different ball game.
What the technical hurdle of just getting RNA across?
It's RNA, that's a great question, thanks.
I love that question, I've been living with that question for years.
Yeah, so if you want to get RNA out of the bloodstream into a tissue it helps if the
tissue helps you out on its own.
In the liver there are certain blood vessels so I'll take a sit back and say that the blood
vessels that are sort of lying your liver are different than the blood vessels that line
your lung and the different ones that line your brain and the blood vessels that line
like an average artery in your heart for instance are different than the blood vessels that
line a vein in your heart so there's heterogeneity both across tissues and within the tissue
and you can use that to your advantage.
There are wonderful delivery vehicles for delivering small RNAs to hepatocytes in the
liver and one of the reasons why allegedly they work so well is because some of the blood
vessels in the liver actually a little holes punched in them so the holes might be between
a, you know, so imagine like a garden hose with like a bunch of holes punched in it and
then you want to get stuff out of the garden hose it's going to get out of the garden
hose more so than a garden hose that doesn't have any holes on it, right?
And so those fenestra or like little windows in the liver help drugs get across so that's
one thing and you know besides that to be honest I mean we don't really know, we don't really
know we know that we can use these physical barriers to our advantage but if we want to
actively target something like the brain or the lung or something that doesn't have those
physical advantages and we have to get clever and you know it's hard to get clever.
I was thinking as you were talking the two of you brain disorders are very different
too it's like cancers are different although they're finding some similarities and
listening to them are seeing cancers comparatively easier.
Yeah exactly because not all brain disorders are equal and you have the package of disorders
it had to do with depression and mania and psychosis and then you have the package it
has to do with neurodegenerative disease like Alzheimer's and Parkinson's and other
dimensions and then the other more complex kinds of ALS kinds of things they have spinal
connections it's such a complex area to try to figure out a can you just figure out can
you just explain what's happening number one which we're not there yet.
Number two even if you can't explain can you at least rejigger it somehow to get some kind
of different outcome than what the patient is experiencing and that's going to be complex
because you've got these different combinations.
Yes I think the biology is so complex but I would have to say since I'm I hope to be
an optimist is that is that as a society we have figured out how to treat patients in
a completely different way which is through psychotherapy right which I think is one
of the most effective ways people have shown that whether it be psychodynamic, psychoanalytic
or cognitive behavioral they all seem to have an effect size that is sometimes larger than
the drugs we use and I think this is something we can take advantage of.
I mean we which I think gets to the whole point that this is what we call targeted environment
you're actually using the environment you're trying to we program the brain by having a
discussion with someone else I mean obviously I'm simplifying it beyond means but the one
example I'm going to give and I apologize this is an example from my lab but so it's
sort of biased but so we've been studying post-traumatic stress disorder and actually
I actually see patients coming back from Iraq and Afghanistan and actually what I first
of all I've noticed is they're all really young they're like they're 22 to 24 years
old there's young soldiers and I really makes it what I've been working with them for about
five six years and and I realized that they're essentially adolescents so that we essentially
are sending our soldiers our adolescents to war because you don't send 30 year olds to
war you send 18 to 22 year olds and what we're what my colleague BJ Casey who was also at
the Sackler Institute we're in we're very we were very much trying to tailor treatments
at different stages of development and we recently have made a fairly significant we think well
and not not like New York time significant but just like lab significance advance in the
sense that we find that if we do different types of what we call exposure based treatments
in both humans and in our mice that we study that we actually get different what different
levels of attenuation of memories so in many ways you can imagine as I was discussing before
that that the brain is really developing during different stages and we've noticed now that
adolescents in particular is very plastic you're much more plastic during you're actually
much smarter than you are at other points in development and we think that we can possibly
tailor new types of behavioral treatments which are not whatever don't involve blood
brain barrier and so you can imagine another form of precision medicine is actually trying
to target the right time when your brain is ready it's very similar to the way we've
been very much informed by the work of like decades ago there was the Nobel Prize was
given for what they call critical periods of visual plasticity that if you have someone
that has doesn't have perfect aligned vision you had a window of about five years before
when you had to actually close one eye and let the other eye get stronger and basically
and if you miss that window you could not do things and we think that in psychiatric disorders
at least in the simple realm of something like fear learning or fear post traumatic stress
disorder you might be able to find a window where you can actually alter memories or alter
the emotional valence of memories because the brain is much more plastic again this is just
like the tip of the iceberg but then you could imagine if you could bootstrap this that ultimately
you could possibly then add a drug on top of it so right now we're doing a clinical trial
with these veterans where in addition to giving them exposure therapy we're actually giving
them a cognitive enhancer it's not a very good one I can say that but you can imagine
the future in the future of psychiatry might be where you combine what is probably the
most effective treatment where you actually get because not only psychotherapy is not
just what happens in the if you think about it for a patient to be in psychotherapy or
see a psychiatrist or psychologist they actually have to get out of their room and travel somewhere
so there's something about that whole movement which we think is much more important that
they're re-engaged with the environment in some way and that you could imagine in the
future it'll be this combination of using potentially drugs RNA or other biologics and
also but combining with psychotherapy I think we're now at a point where we're realizing
that one drug won't do it or one therapy won't do it so I think that's I mean that's sort
of the future I think you've touched you haven't you haven't gotten there but the logical discussion
that's going on in the ethics literature is so where so when you when if and when we get
to the point where you can fix PTSD and societies have always sent young boys to war that's
not new it's always been young boys by by draft in most in most historical moments you
don't have a choice the logical extension is well if you can fix the brain after this
horrific trauma and maybe even erase those horrible memories which you know there are
some drugs that are being discussed about that then what is what are the societal implications
for that for nation states and wars and so on if we can and even if you could gene edit
something later on to erase bad memories about killing and bad memories of trauma do we then
have a societal or other societal implications for the use of those therapeutics and the use
of those techniques or reasons that may be nefarious and not necessarily what we would
like to talk about yes no the brain is actually quite no I think it's a very good point I think
the best way the best anecdote I had heard about this is from Joe Lidou who's a neuroscientist
at New York University if you see a car crash outside you have a memory of it you go home
and within six hours for some reason has to be six hours but within six hours if you then
watch a TV news of episode of it and it's slightly different and you will update that
memory and the memory will be more like the newscast than your eyewitness account of it
and so this is what they call updating your memory so this I think is what you're saying
about this is actually quite dangerous which means that memories are not as fixed in this
I saw it as we think and it can it's always amenable to updating or in many some cases
potentially erasure right yeah so that you can update or and this is how I think this
is the danger that you could imagine that you there are various forms of treatments
that could actually lead to significant updating in a different way than it was we of course
want to think of it in a therapeutic way that we're going to try to update it and make
previously bad memories lose their emotional or fearful valence but you can imagine they
could go the other way the best example I have of this is I was talking to a general
from when we're doing a DoD study the Department of Defense study and when the soldiers first
came off the field and this has not been published but he said that what they did add
and totally they were and they know that they had been under a very traumatic experience
they gave all of them either ambient or clonipin these are sort of tranquilizer drugs and but
what all neuroscientists know is that sleep consolidates memories so so they looked temporarily
calmer they woke up and became more frightened because their memories had been consoled
acquired and consolidated so you can imagine that that that especially when we put our our
our adolescent citizens into war situations this is actually quite a dangerous situation
because we could actually make things much worse and my colleague also I have a colleague
Richard Friedman who is a psychiatrist but also writes for the New York Times and what
he mentioned is that he's noticed that the people and he's written about this so this
is in the New York Times that that there's an incredibly high use of amphetamines because
when you're on on in the field you have to stay awake and so then the but then this also
consolidates and makes you remember things much better just as anyone who's given a patient
ritalin this is essentially they're giving ritalin to others the soldiers and that ultimately
your your fearful memories also get hyper consolidated as a result of this so again we're we are
already doing things right now manipulating memories even potentially inadvertently even
though the government doesn't really think they're doing it and it was actually very
hard for Richard to actually extract this information from the government actually they've been using
amphetamines for a long time at least since World War II absolutely yeah in the military
yeah I mean from my perspective I don't from a drug discovery perspective I don't think
we're gonna be in the game but yeah we're looking to hemophilia and cystic fibrosis
and yeah that's kind of what we look at where does your field does it intersect at all with
brain interface in any way sure I mean we look at trying to design drugs for Alzheimer's
or Parkinson's I mean my field specifically asks a more simple question which is can we
full stop can we get drugs into the brain genetic drugs into the brain the underlying
hypothesis is that the biologists and the geneticists are going to come up with genetic
targets to treat disease X or disease Y or disease Z the one thing that those diseases
have in common is that no matter what gene you're going after you have to deliver that
genetic therapy so that that's where we live as we ask the simple question which is you
know can we use chemical engineering or nanotechnology or bioengineering to just get a
genetic drug into the brain period and then you know if we succeed and we say okay we're
gonna go after Parkinson's or if we get it to the long we're gonna go after cystic fibrosis
so we do interface with with neurologists and neuroscientists but only in that context
yeah and when you talk about getting targeted therapeutics to the brain are you talking
through a pill or through a transfusion or through brain surgery or all three so a pill
would be great but ideally yeah but but we're talking IV infusion oral delivery is incredibly
hard and it's kind of interesting why it's hard IV administration is already hard enough
because it goes to the liver right yeah well IV just it'll go through it'll pump out everywhere
and then the liver tends to soak things up as does the spleen and kidney but but if you
give something orally if you have a hamburger 20 minutes before you take that pill or you
don't the entire environment in your gut the receptors that are expressed the bacteria
that are everything changes so it's extremely hard to get something to get oral oral delivery
so I think you know the first genetic drugs that you'll see are likely to be either subcutaneous
administration or intravenous administration well so with Parkinson's other doing stem
cell injections actually through surgery through so so do you work with people who are thinking
about going that route or are you in a different kind of fall this is kind of a third rail
for me right now because I'm not a stem cell biologist so I don't want to sip out on too
much of a limb here but I do have colleagues who work on stem cell therapies I think that
some stem cell therapies will have the potential to be useful others others will not I can't
speak to Parkinson's but would you but would you think would but would there be a potential
drug that would that you might be able to discover that would only be able to be through
brain through brain surgery actually directly into the brain so this is one of the advantages
to the new gene editing technology so we were talking about distinguishing between like
sort of traditional gene therapies and new gene therapies one of the advantages to in
theory and again theory to these new gene therapies is that the effects are to some extent fairly
permanent so the analogy is that if you were to use an sirna which has a temporary effect
and you wanted to do something in cardiomyocytes you know like writing though or I will just
stick in the brain you want to do you want to do it in the brain you know if the effect
of the drug lasts like if you're lucky in the last three months you're not going to be able
to go in and perform brain surgery every three months right so that's not really an option
however if you have one of these new gene therapies where the effect is again in theory
pretty permanent then if you got the therapy to be effective enough then you could do you
could say okay we're going to perform a brain surgery and just spray a ton of this stuff
where we want it and we know just because we're these new gene therapies are semi-permanent
that the effects are going to last a really long time and therefore you know we're going
to look at this therapy now I don't know if people are looking into that but I know that
my colleagues and I when we think about this say oh this is actually kind of interesting
because it would open up like the pancreas or local administration to the heart in ways
that we haven't thought about before simply because the effect in the right type of cells
quiescent cells long-lasting cells is actually pretty pretty so how would you how would you
actually do this in human research because you can't go from the bench to the bedside
without doing studies and how would you actually study the long-term effects what kind of
endpoints would you be looking for that would be reasonably acceptable risk and yeah over
time I mean at least you can go back if you give somebody in some kind of a therapy with
the kidney or the heart or diabetes you can go back into follow-up testing that's not
sometimes it's invasive but it may be minimally invasive whereas if you're doing gene editing
yeah so and again there are people both probably on this panel and even in this room they probably
have more of an expertise in this and I do but when I when I think about this and I try
to think practically in the way that I would ever consider doing something like this I'd
say okay well what procedures are minimally invasive and access that tissue already in
other words are we going in already in a bunch of patients so if you're you know putting
a scope in and you're like in the heart as is could you just spray some stuff in there
while you're taking your pictures or if you're you know doing a colonoscopy and you're already
you know in that area can you just spray stuff in locally and I imagine that would be a reasonable
starting starting point but again there there you know that's really an answer for a practicing
clinician because they would say no you idiot like you know that isn't going to work you
know it's better to you know this would be useful I'm looking to the clinician from cancer
perspective because you can follow up by looking at yeah I said that one so my only
excursion and distanced those for Parkinson's and editing them was from a cancer point of
view and the idea of implanting basically precursors of neurons into the brain it's a dangerous
proposition too because these cells do have plasticity in the wrong ways right they can
in fact form tumors and so with I think a lot of these new technologies whether it's genome
editing or stem cells you need to think of engineering a fail-safe switch what happens
if these cells suddenly decided now they will form a tumor and there are studies on stem
cells they are just more likely to cause tumors so you need to to anticipate that and you need
to be able to to get rid of them genetic ways of doing it and then we can do a lot of cool
things genetically and we can eliminate them that's sort of my my an option basically an
ideally you'd want it in a way that you know let's say someone needs a new liver and you're
able to grow it in the lab right and some population of these liver cells decide to become a liver
cancer the patient still needs the rest of the liver so you don't want to wipe out everything
you want to have a way that ideally selectively destroys these tumor cells but perhaps leaves
the rest of the liver intact and even that you can you can do there are ways of doing
this you know these are suicide genes basically that kill specific cells and a specific circumstances
these things are all technically possible you can engineer cells before implanting them
in a patient or an animal for a time being and have those cells perform specific functions
and you can install failsafe mechanisms to take them out when they misbehave in a way
that you didn't want them okay questions thank you for a very interesting discussion there's
an area that perhaps ought to receive some attention in this age of over promise how
do we pay for the research when Galileo made his observations it didn't cost a billion
dollars the way it did to show the two black holes went were in collision so the cost of
this kind of research has mounted exponentially what about the cost for biomedical research
right now I have friends who when they hear the word socialism they faint but when I suggest
that the NIH is funding research they don't see that that's a form of socialism where
should the funding come from are we funding adequately do we need to fund it more and
are we over promising well of course research is expensive new therapies are expensive too
I think still in the context of the budget of the country it's nothing it's a drop in
the buckets compared to military spending compared to this successful operation in Iraq
a few years ago the money that is spent on cancer or psychological research is basically
nothing in comparison and I think it's ultimately more useful even if 99% of it will never lead
to clinical application a few things that actually do work immensely valuable so if
you are a government and you want to spend your money wisely it's probably one way to
go the related question I mentioned that the new therapies are also expensive so if you
think about the controversy about drug expenses and so on so there's a company that makes
a new drug against hepatitis C it's a pill it's a pill right you take it for a certain
number of months and they want a hundred thousand dollars for it prevent just the new other
other drug for cancer for a second cancer thirty thousand dollars three times and you'd
say that's insane how's it possible and it's expensive on the other hand up to now the same
patient would need a liver transplant it's gone across 200 300 400 thousand dollars even
even in those extreme cases where a company is really trying to make a lot of profit on
what is not even their own research partially maybe even there I think you still have a
benefits so Galileo and others were funded by the Catholic Church
a fairly wealthy and they were patrons of they were patrons of very wealthy people in
this culture so as an educator and an enthusiastic skeptic I absolutely agree we make prior we
make bad prior decision making in this country we have our priorities are wrong this is my
own personal view and I come from being trained and wanting to be an educator my whole life
and I think our priorities are wrong until recently the National Institutes of Health was
the largest funder of research that is in happens surpassed by private sector and mainly
by venture capital firms which many people here are familiar with which sometimes the
term venture capital sounds to those who are socialistic inclined bad but I think it's
a good thing that there's a mix but there's a huge problem now with conflicts of interest
in science and so that's another whole ethical dimension about where the money is coming
from and if you know all the movies that you watch you just follow the money there are
lots of complex issues many people argue for public private partnerships with and I come
from a political science background so I'm the person who always says in the sunshine
in the sunshine in the sunshine transparency accountability good governance with public
participation that's my fantasy as a non scientist where I would like to get yeah and just
in your early point I'd like just to sort of reemphasize things here which is that first
it may seem like the NIH budget is very large but it is not and I can say for a fact that
many of the colleagues that have grown up in sort of my scientific generation who would
make incredible professors incredible researchers I'd say I won't put in a exact number many
of them more than 50 percent well more than 50 percent do not go into academic science
because there is no research money and that is the exact reason why I know that when I
was considering taking a faculty job there were other jobs that were on the table as
well and I've always wanted to be a professor I think teaching students is incredible I'm
proud of the students I've taught so far it's the greatest joy in my life and yet I almost
took a different type of position because the grants are so hard to get that is the reason
why I almost didn't go in and it's the reason why everybody in my generation if they do
not go in that's the reason why they don't go in the other thing I think is a really
important point to understand is that it's really hard I would say it is impossible to
predict what is going to be useful down the line so today we've discussed a lot about
this new technology called these gene editing technologies and right now the most easy to
use gene editing technologies called CRISPR-Cas9 and right now I mean everybody knows about
CRISPR-Cas9 in the biological field it's considered arguably the biggest biotechnology
discovery in 40 years totally changing the world and that was originally discovered by
a bunch of bacteriologists sequencing some random repeats in an unknown bacteria and
saying oh that's weird these things look the same now if you put that grant in that 1980s
grant into the NIH system right now that doesn't get funded and 30 years down the line we don't
have CRISPR-Cas9 and that's the huge risk that we're facing right now is that there's
all these incredible transformational potentially transformational technologies 30 years 40 years
down the line that we're not stumbling onto because that's how science works so I think
it's really important to support increase in NIH funding you guys can believe me or not
obviously I'm sort of biased in that because this is important to me but I think there's
ample evidence to support the fact that that these discoveries are hard to make and there
are many people who want to do a great job who just are leaving the field right now because
there's no money but it's not just NIH funding because let's state so NIH is federal funding
so yes our federal dollars paper research but state funding for research and education
has been decimated in my lifetime I started as an academic teaching in 1989 or no age 1985
and it was being decimated in its continued science programs that were at public schools
you're at a private school but Georgia Georgia Tech gets public funding I've been cut dramatically
I wanted to ask a question I studied computer science and not biotechnology so when I look
at something like you know the RNA you know delivery of you know whether it's transmission
or messaging I think in sort of a computer model where you know we might send something
with an assist and rather than waiting for it to eventually succeed or break down we immediately
see an acknowledgement like we would see you know like an AC or an ACK it would say right
away send back this message and you say yes it succeeded it's failed and I've never heard
of anything like that within sort of the study of medicine where you know I think in terms
of you know is there it's more like eventually you see a cancer marker or you see a disorder
in the blood or this thing happens and it's measured maybe through a blood test but I wondered
I don't know enough about it to know is there something that you can immediately see that
is this sort of feedback within the system loop.
So it's you know it's a difficult question to say yes or no to I will point you to a
field you may like reading about just for fun it's called synthetic biology it's a new
field very experimental right now but actually that sits right at the interface of basically
computer scientists like yourself and bioengineers and there are many universities now that actually
have faculty members whose research are sort of dedicated to living right at that interface
and it's really funny you'll see a biological paper published and they'll put in diagrams
that have resistors and transistors and the equivalent of that stuff in the circuitry of
the cell and so you know I don't know the field one enough to say yes or no that hazard
hasn't happened yet but it may have and if so I would say synthetic biology is a likely
place to find that.
I think you sort of asked about immediate readouts of whether you know your message arrives and
whether you get an effect.
Sorry and I think so in drug studies certainly that's something that you need to be able
to measure immediately you give a new drug and you want to be able to know the drug hit
the target and how effectively and for how long it suppresses that so that's certainly
part of any medical any drug study that you want.
You have a call it a biomarker just something that says it got there and it did what it's
supposed to do.
I have a question about the field of optogenetics and channel redoxins and also the delivery
how did they get it into the specific parts of the brain I've read a lot about it and
confused about that part and also the ethical implications of turning on and off neurons
in particular parts of the brain using channel redoxins.
Well I'll quickly address the delivery part and I'll let the experts handle the media
part of the question.
Luckily the answer is pretty simple as far as understand it.
No black magic here they basically say okay we're going to take a virus that encodes the
optogenetic whatever channel redoxins you would like and they spray it in where they want
to spray it in.
They might use a cell type specific promoter to make sure it's only expressed in neurons
as opposed to glia but yeah they basically just and then you know you're good.
But I think interesting enough mainly because there's a technical glitch almost all optogenetics
now is in rats and mice because all the promoters have been done.
There seems to be a technical glitch of getting to primates so that there is not that much
of the ultimate use of optogenetics in humans is probably not going to be the reason why
optogenetics is so powerful up until now is because we had these very powerful promoter
specific expressions so you could go right to one type of dopamine neuron for example
and turn it on and in the monkey you cannot do it.
So all the experiments so far in monkey and you can tell scientists are not stupid so
if you see how many people are going towards trying to translate this to human optogenetics
it seems to be very low it seems to be something that not is not something because you have
to actually put a fiber optic cable it's very complicated.
I think in the future there is another type of technology which is still in its sort of
in essence is now being developed at many places but in particular at Rockefeller University
where instead of putting a virus that gets turned on by light but will get turned on
by a magnetic beam so that is something that is possible in terms of developing better
and stronger ways of turning on magnetic fields within a darkened chamber like the brain and
I think that's an area.
What they have definitely been able to do is turn on a magnetic beam on the pancreas and
get it to secrete insulin so that they can definitely do something like that so I think
that will probably be something that will people would much rather have a magnet put
on your abdomen than a fiber optic cable so I think that will probably be the 10, 5, 10
years from now.
But the ethical concerns of optogenetics for primate human and non-human are probably
not that critical because the technical difficulties are a little bit too great right now and
you can't get funding for it.
Well there are some questions that have come up about controlling the brain though in some
other technologies so deep brain stimulation and neuro enhancement not drug neuro enhancement
but mechanisms the electronic.
There's two issues, well there's more than two issues but free will is one but another
one is what if I like what happens to me when I have deep brain stimulation or I'm using
a neuro enhancer and I can figure out how to do it and jigger with it on my own and
the clinician does not want to go there for a variety of reasons and there have been some
discussions in the ethical field about the rights of the patient to be able to say either
stop this which we in medical ethics we basically acknowledge the patients right to say I don't
want chemotherapy, I don't want the heart surgery, whatever, I don't want a brain interface.
But the other flip side is I really like this, I like being manic and there's some literature
on this now and I like what this has done to me and I don't want to come down from whatever
the particular brain not drugs we're talking about are the kinds of interventions although
we could be talking about drugs but this is in the non drug field so it does raise some
interesting questions about individual control and then if people have control over what's
happening in terms of computers and chips and then the data that comes from that information
and who has access to that data is another whole realm.
I think the only comment I have is analgesia right so there were and maybe there's still
their pain control where patients can control their own medication and basically give themselves
opiates right and I think the conclusion of that research was that they actually administer
less than if it is given by the doctors and the nurses who have been self-controllable
actually do less than for better or worse it's actually a surprising.
And you will know when you mention that we knew all there was to know about Huntington
you know identifying it but we didn't know how to control or to take interventions this
is very disturbing to me not what you said but that it's like it's closing it's as though
it's closing so much because I think that I just heard of something and it was about
post-traumatic syndrome and that other people have it you know we begin to realize under
other circumstances and it had a lot to do with mindfulness now and this was people
who were rather responsible saying that you know just controlling your mind and that gets
into the psychoanalysis of it but it seems that how do you get support when you have
some idea that's way out there that I have one more question and it was do you divide
your field into dimensions you know this is this is what is happening in the cell this
is what we can do to control that thing that's happening in the cell I mean are there all
these steps that you you know do you go into this and different this I should know this
but do you go into different disciplines or aspects of your discipline so I there were
kind of three questions well it's a great set of questions so to your first question
about about Huntington's so I remain optimistic that we will be able to deliver to Huntington's
and my lab works on new delivery technologies and there are many great labs across the
U.S. and also work on on the delivery technologies I think historically science most of the time
fails but a friend of mine says that you know all your failure all your failures don't
don't matter it's really your the few wins that you get that actually make a difference
and I agree with that so I wouldn't be dissuaded or feel pessimistic yeah
oh well you who's who's doing more basic oh by the way you're absolutely correct we don't
know what the protein Huntington actually does yep we really still don't understand
that yeah so and I should have been more clear earlier what I meant is from a therapeutic
perspective we know the sequence to go after and that is an important distinction I didn't
make that clearly so that's my fault to your second question I'll I'll intro that quickly
in my lab we do think about things in different layers and we purposefully try to position
ourselves at interfaces of new technology or different fields and that's how we try to
thrive so we try to use genomics and genetics and really big data sets to make our chemical
engineering systems better that's how we try to distinguish ourselves so I know that
are in our lab we do purposefully subdivide things and then right look right where that
interface is.
Thank you very much for very professional conversation and I have a lot of questions
but I would like to ask about simple techniques not like generating interventions for example
couple of years ago I on routine tests I it was I got really bad results on very routine
tests and I of course I straight was sent to more invasive tests and I was scared to
that that I should do this instead of this I start to read and that I a lot of information
right now a lot of research that could some got some way but then lost finding and in
my case it was actually I should just change diet I just stop stop drink what I liked I
liked very much so milk that was it in couple of months my test was okay everybody but everybody
you're amazed it was it was not possible from their point of view so why we cannot yes maybe
really test more people and give them these some kind of connection that probably some
something in your environment in your diet could cause it why don't don't try it for
example there are some research that psychological problems could be caused by our gut flow
micro flow and just prebiotics could change our brain functions or there are some research
that fish oil could really improve a lot of brain functions why we don't make these simple
connections without go to invasive tests and very expensive treatments because there are
a lot of great doctors out there who probably make a lot of those connections and can probably
help you I'm glad that you got better by changing the diet I think there first of all you I
can leave you there's smarter doctors but then also at Cornell I just realized this also we
hired we have a new microbiome project and I didn't realize that our entire gut floor
all our bacteria weighs more than our brain the mouth it's like five or six pounds of
bacteria inside our body so it's not so simple it's not one bacteria and it's the genome of
the bacteria is 30 to 40 times more complex than the genome we have ourselves so that
you can imagine it's it looks like on the surface like it's simple it's actually much
more complex because then you're it's almost like we were studying a lake and that's an
ocean okay anyone else okay thank you very much thank you
