Now to today's roundtable on happiness.
Alberto Bisson, Professor of Economics at NYU,
Shimon Edelman, Professor of Psychology at Cornell University,
Benjamin Radcliffe, Professor of Political Science
at the University of Notre Dame, Wendy Suzuki,
Professor of Neuroscience and Psychology at New York
University, and Christine Vittrano, Associate Professor
of Philosophy at Brooklyn College.
And now we'll begin.
Let's have a question for the panel.
I wonder whether you know whether happiness
has been measured as a function of stress levels
in a country or a society, and physiological cortisol
levels in the blood, or wherever other stress levels you have.
There's been some work done on that.
I know that people with hypertension
are less happy than other people.
But in terms of cross-national comparisons,
I don't know.
The other thing they do not exactly measure,
they correlate it with the way you smile.
There are measurements of how you smile, which
relate to how happy you are.
And they naturally do that.
So OK, the idea of what she is happy.
Yeah, exactly.
So they also have measured, yes, so I actually
don't know which kind of a blood testing group.
But there's an enormous battery of correlation.
I just wonder, because I did a study,
kind of another microcosm level in Y students,
who were students doing exercise one time a week more
during the whole semester, compared
to another class that didn't exercise that much,
beginning at the end of the semester.
I didn't realize that I was doing a stress study,
because stress goes up a lot at the end of the semester.
What I found was the performance
on cognitive tests, memory tests, of my students
that exercised stayed the same from the beginning to the end.
But the other class that didn't exercise with me in class
went significantly down, because exercise protects
the perciput campus from stress, protects the prefrontal cortex
from cortisol.
And so I just started wondering about stress levels.
Yeah, I know that they measured the exact stress level.
So I don't know how you would measure stress level,
but there's all sorts of patterns.
Yeah, exactly.
On a group level, there have been several recent studies
about socioeconomic strata groups that are better off
or worse off at different times of the year.
You've probably not studied from MIT.
So farmers who grow one crop a year,
just before they harvest, they are the most stressed.
And so they have the proper control.
It's a wonderful study.
I forget the names of the people.
It's very easy to Google them.
But the interesting aspect was that the amount of stress
seriously affected negatively, seriously affected
the cognitive abilities of the people.
Yeah, it does.
And of course, if this is not a seasonal thing for you,
if you're stressed because you are economically,
I mean, if you are physically stressed
because economically stressed, you're
in a hole that becomes more and more difficult for you
to get out of.
You just dig yourself more in because you're
cognitively impaired.
Right.
And it's really a travesty when someone says,
there's a famous quote about, I think,
Orhan Pamuk, the Turkish writer, said,
the biggest mistake people made in the last thousand years
was to assume that poor people are stupid.
So there are two sides to this coin.
They wouldn't be.
They were not poor, I guess.
That's one way of putting it.
And another comment that your question, when you brought
to mind, is in Baboon's stress was studied across stress.
Robert Sapolsky's work.
I'm sure you know that the guy who
was running around taking saliva tests from Baboon's,
not an easy task, and discovered wonderful things
about social status, especially younger,
the lessened males, and how they can be very negatively
affected by being rejected, by being a young.
If you're number 20 in the Baboon's of males,
you basically have a brain and the physiology of somebody
with PTSD.
Right.
Because you're chronic stress.
You get beat up all the time, you don't have sex at all.
And so this is another aspect.
This is a complementary aspect in which someone who is already
in the hole gets even worse because of the dynamics of this.
And we have to recognize this is our nature.
This is our physical nature.
Exactly.
And that is why the main reason why social democracy makes
people happier in part is it reduces their stress levels
and permanent levels of anxiety about living in a market
society, and particularly people at the lower end
of that spectrum.
At least it makes them think they live in a market.
I just saw an ad on the subway coming in here.
I think it was from 7-Eleven.
You can buy now your drink in two colors of cup, red or blue.
And you know, have your say.
Have your choice, free choice, land of free choice.
The elephant or the donkey.
You have your choice.
So are you coming to the conclusion
that happiness can be defined as low stress and low anxiety
on an individual level and that those social things that
alter it have to do with the fact that they bring down
the stress level in people?
The last part I would agree with that.
I personally would not say that happiness is
isomorphic or equivalent to low levels of anxiety.
But that anxiety is a cause or a correlate of happiness.
So if you reduce anxiety, you reduce you increase happiness.
So they're not identical by any means.
There's a normal variation, again,
of the things equal, right?
So all these studies are done correctly
from a statistical point of view.
They are done at the same sequence.
So you keep your own regressions where essentially you
put these individual variables and a bunch of other things.
So again, happiness depends on how they take.
So given the level of your anxiety, you're happier.
If you're rich, given the level of your wealth,
you're happier if you're less anxious.
Given the level of your wealth and anxiety,
you're happier if you have more sex.
You're happier if you exercise.
If you don't have kids or things of this sort.
So these are all correlates.
It's actually true.
This is one of the puzzles is this issue of kids.
It's very widespread in the literature
that people with kids are not as happy as me without kids.
No, that's absolutely true.
And of course, and people.
Yeah, until they leave.
Right.
It goes back, right?
So, again, from the economist point of view,
people still are doing kids.
Why aren't they?
So one of the two measures is a problem.
But on other dimensions, no, right?
On the stress or sex or other things,
people are happy when they do it and they do it.
But the kids is the other way around.
So the point I want to try and make is these things all move.
They're all correlated.
It's very hard to do any causation argument.
And in a case, they are all correlated.
So we look at variations where you keep one thing cost
and you move the rest.
So all contribute.
If you think of them in a causal manner, which perhaps you
shouldn't, but if you do, still all of these are causing
all of these measures are causing happiness.
I think you can, from a philosophical standpoint,
I don't think it's so hard to explain.
I know people think that it's so, you know,
it's comical and sort of mysterious.
And I always, in like my first day of class and my happiness
class, I always hit my students with that because they're
always like, oh, you know, a lot of them
don't have children and they're thinking they want to have
children and I tell them, well, if you want to be happy,
that's not one of the things you want to do.
But I think that the reason that the studies show that
is because when you pull people the way that typically
these results come from these poles of people,
happiness is a very limited, I mean, if you think of happiness
as just your sort of satisfaction with your life,
kids are, I mean, I have two children.
So I mean, they're a huge source of, you know, very, very
positive and very, very negative emotions.
I felt like before I had kids, my emotional range was like this.
And then when I had kids, I was like, wow,
there's this whole spectrum I didn't even know existed
in terms of like, I've never been happier and like,
I've never been more miserable, more frustrated,
more terrified, et cetera, et cetera.
And I think that that speaks to the idea
that there are a lot of values out there that
make for a good life other than happiness
and that the, you know, this fixation we have on just being
happy, that's a very limited thing.
It's, you know, was my life easier before I could?
Absolutely, especially because I had a job.
You know, I could write and work whenever I wanted,
I could travel whenever, now I have kids.
So when my life is bound to them and very limited,
I have to put myself last all the time
because they're my kids and I love them and I do it willingly.
But that in terms of my personal happiness,
life was way easier before I had them.
And I think that, do they make my life more meaningful?
Do they give me purpose?
Do they, you know, I would never,
have wanted to live without them, you know?
But at the same time, in terms of like,
personal happiness, no, you know,
they feel a lot of frustration and anxiety there.
I'm up at two a.m. worrying about, you know,
not myself, them.
So, you know, I think that, you know,
and speaking to what you said before,
about, you know, sort of the dangers of, you know,
because happiness is reflective of your expectations
and everything else, it is dangerous
when you just focus on happiness
because you can make people happier
by just convincing them that they don't,
they're perfectly fine with the life they have
versus, you know, wanting more
and risking being more unsatisfied with your life.
And I think that's perfectly fine, you know,
because there are these other values, you know,
when you strive for something, when you work towards something,
you're gonna be dissatisfied in the process
and that's good, you know?
Doesn't that suggest that perhaps you could take up
a little bit more discussion of, you know,
the, the, the, the, the, the,
the, the, the, the, the, the, the judgment of,
the value of the good in life
and how that bears unhappiness
because the way you're describing it,
it's almost as if you could separate happiness
from defining what the good is
because as you're saying, well, there are,
there are elements of having a child
that pertains to a higher good.
Do you derive happiness from that?
I think, yeah.
I think, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, that's true.
I mean, my view of, we just wrote a book on this topic too,
so my view of what makes for a good life would be,
happiness is a necessary component.
I would definitely say that if you're not satisfied
with your life, you're not having a good life.
And I would say it's happiness achieved
in sort of morally acceptable ways
where that sort of is a very personal choice
about what that is.
But I think that there are a lot of goods in life
and philosophers love to, which we sort of rail against them,
tell people what they ought to be doing,
aesthetic, this, intellectual, that, and blah, blah, blah.
Philosophy is always on that list.
And we sort of reject all of those lists
of what is the good life.
And we sort of say, look, it's how you can find happiness
with your life, but there are a lot of goods out there.
There are a lot of, and you have to have a long-term approach
to not just the sort of short-term, you know,
I'm going to do what makes me feel good right now,
but what is ultimately going to be good in the long-term.
That, by the way, has a clear evolutionary advantage.
So the major finding of this study,
of mine that I mentioned, is agents, those simulated little agents
that compete, those that have a longer window of memory looking back
over which things are counted, like successes with any account,
they do better on the evolutionary timescale.
So we kind of have evolved, I guess,
extrapolating to real agents like ourselves, in that sense,
we have evolved to have, and this is actually well-known
by psychologists who would discover the independently
just by asking people different types of questions.
You can ask them, are you happy just right now?
And also, what's your life evaluation?
Those are the two classes of questions.
So can we go back?
So this is a good question.
This is the arguments you were making are exactly the reason
why economics don't like happiness.
And they like a choice-based measure, right?
Because the people who have kids and they want to have them,
the people who don't have them and don't want to have them,
the people who have them, they don't want them,
the people who don't when they want.
Okay, so you look at these people and you rent them.
You can see what they want, what they have and so on.
So the word, and then call whatever they get in exchange
for these choices that are, in some of these cases,
are what they are chosen.
They have a really choice in some cases.
So what they get in exchange, we call it utility,
but you can still call it happiness now.
And this is a way of getting at the point without finding
all these paradoxes of, you know,
and really this is really the fundamental reason why
economists tend to or at least classical economists,
certain kind of economists, so however you want to characterize
and don't like the concept.
Now, the other way you can go, so one way is just,
let's not define happiness and let's see what people do
and wearing strange conditions, typically they do what they want
to do, not all.
So you have to be careful about that too, but, okay,
you try and do that.
The other way, of course, is going the way we're talking
before, which is you try and get a little bit more into the
details of what happiness means, because again,
happiness is the way it's measured.
So in many places, the GSS measures it with general questions
of the sort, you know, how even taking stock of your life
at this point, how happy do you think you are?
Other people, other experiment asks questions where
how happy are you right now, right this moment, right?
So these are two very different constants of happiness
and you can imagine many more.
So not just in terms of time, you can imagine many more,
you can imagine asking the question in many different ways,
you can imagine stressing various different aspects.
And so at this point, so that's the sense in which then the question
becomes kind of meaningless, because if there are a million
questions which are more or less correlated, we need
theorizing behind it.
So just all you need is factor analysis.
And you ask a whole lot of questions or even give them an
opportunity to get freely and then you use natural language
processing.
You can try and do that.
Or once again, you can have them choose, make choices,
and you're going to have to do factor analysis.
It doesn't always work.
The choices are three in many aspects.
So just to add another challenge to the way that we're talking
about this, is happiness always self-evident or can someone
not be aware that they're unhappy?
Or happy?
Yeah, I think this is a very big question.
I don't know.
There are certainly, so one issue certainly, so I don't,
of course, I don't know how would I know.
I'm trying to translate in terms of what we know in the
happening, in the happiness literature.
So I can go back to what we were saying before.
One fundamental aspect of measures of happiness, realize
measures of happiness, is expectations.
So those are perhaps a little bit less conscious.
So I think I should be very rich because whatever, and I'm not,
and I don't really know why I'm answering that I'm not happy.
So a lot of this is playing a big role.
To me, so that's certainly a dimension where I don't know how
conscious I am about my expectations.
Some certainly I am conscious about.
Maybe there are some that I'm not.
And the impression is that all of this play a big role in the
answering this question.
So all this idea about people adapting to situations, they all
have to do with expectations.
So at some point you're on a wheelchair, and you're not
that unhappy anymore, your expectations obviously are not
the place of current somehow.
Or to do it.
And somehow this, at the moment where you go on a wheelchair,
your happiness drops to a bit more levels, and then you go back.
So this is the fact of us.
And how conscious is that?
I don't know how much there's actually a rationalization
exposed.
I'm sure if you ask people why are you happy, they'll tell you,
yes, I was running before, but they discover that happiness,
it's only a sign.
It's only my mind.
That's perfectly possible.
I may weigh in on this.
One of my other lines of research is consciousness,
computational phenomenology.
I think in phenomenology or consciousness research, the first
rule is that you have to take the conscious, report the face
value.
Because think of someone seeing red or not seeing red when
looking at a picture that's obviously red.
But they don't see red.
You can't tell them, no, no.
You see red.
You just don't realize that that just doesn't work in conscious
research.
It cannot work in any field in which you want to quantify or study
human feelings.
Because you as the perceiver and experiencer are the ultimate
and only authority in what you feel.
Right?
Yeah, I'm inclined to agree.
I give the first person authority.
I remember it.
My dissertation defense, somebody was like, well, what about
self-deception?
Well, you know, and I didn't have a good answer.
I still don't have a great answer.
I tried to read a bit of that literature and it was just, I
didn't really get anywhere.
But I would just simply say that I think you don't always know
going back to what you were saying.
I don't know that everybody can enumerate what factors are
bothering them or contributing or detracting from happiness.
With a bit of thought, I think you can get there.
But I don't know that everybody, but I do think that when you ask
people, how's it going right now?
How satisfied are you?
They can give you an answer and then sort of backtrack and
figure out why that answer is what it is.
And then the more you think about it, you might find, yeah,
I'm not that satisfied actually.
You know, my job isn't going that well.
I got passed up for promotion or whatever.
But I do think that people do have a sense of how their lives
are going.
And some people are very sort of self-aware and they're
constantly doing these analyses of, I mean, I'm one of those
people, what's right, what's wrong, what do I need to fix?
Other people I think are just kind of more, you know,
things are fine.
It's going well.
But I give the first person authority there.
I think that nobody can tell you that you're not happy because
they don't think your life is matching up to what they expect
from you or the reverse that, you know, you should be happy
because your life is so great.
If you're not feeling it, then clearly something that you
either expect or want or, you know, is not working out for you.
Can we ask a question?
Sure.
So do a lot of scientists measure non-conscious activity in
any way?
So the question here was, what's it?
You do, right?
Yeah.
So why are we saying that, why are we saying that, you know,
I understand one issue is the one of paternalism, you know,
but can I measure the fact that, can she measure the fact that
I don't see that thing read, I guess, in a certain way?
There are such things you can do, right?
The concept of happiness that becomes difficult.
No, no, no, I understand.
I understand.
But yeah, I mean, the answer to your questions.
Yes.
Okay.
Wow.
Wow.
How do you...
Yes.
Yes.
Because there are very specific studies in both psychology
and neuroscience that show that you can see.
You can measure, for example, parts of the brain are responding
correctly, even when the person does not respond
behaviorally correctly.
You calibrate an instrument.
And you always have to do it by triangulation.
You know, this is wonderful simile in Willard, the Norman
Klein's theory of science, about science being like a donkey
skin on a drum, you know, you make it taught so you can play the
drum.
And the places where the skin is fixed to the hoop are the
experimental data.
But science also tells you what's happening in between
by interpolating.
And in regard to subconscious things, you have to go by that
route.
I mean, we can't just put your finger literally or metaphorically
on it.
So it always takes...
You have to involve neuroscientists and computational
scientists who do the analysis of the data and brain
scientists and what not psychologists.
It's always a collective effort.
That's science.
I wanted to go back to this issue of stress and anxiety
and happiness.
Obviously, happiness is a different feeling from, let's say,
anxiety.
But is it possible to be happy if you are under stress or you
have a lot of anxiety?
Well, I think it's obviously an empirical question.
I guess I would say yes, but you are easier to be happy without
stress and anxiety.
Because it seems to me many of the things you were talking about
economically have to do with things that diminish people's
stress.
So that would imply, and I think what Wendy is saying in terms of
her work with exercise is that exercise decreases stress and
therefore can contribute to happiness.
Well, to some way, well, for income to be
diminished stress.
In terms of security.
Yeah.
So in that sense, yes.
But the question, can you say that somebody who is very
anxious is happy, it's difficult to define because happiness here
still is a relative concept.
So what does it mean happy?
If you are saying, can, so if you reformulate the question
saying, can somebody weed that specific level or that you just
level of anxiety, can be happy five?
I don't know.
We can go and measure.
I'm sure there are some people.
You shouldn't say, but it can be happy unfortunately the
literature can't be defined because we just define them.
We just measure in a scale from one to five or one to ten or
whoever we measure it.
So unless you define a cutoff, it's very hard to say, can somebody
receive this problem, psychological problem be happy?
So I had a comment and a question on your initial kind of
concern about how do we talk about happiness.
One of the things that makes me happy is that the research that
I do on exercise and meditation is helping to define things that
increase people's mood, that protects their brain from
degenerative damage of stress.
And yes, it puts mood up and that's one measure of happiness.
But you express some discontent with studies that have been
done and what should we be doing more to what can we do more to
help these numbers in the United States go up of happiness?
To some terms of both of those questions, you pose the
question, how do we make people happier?
The research that I've done, which isn't paid for by anybody
except the University of Notre Dame, it can give you very
clear prescriptions on how to make, I've mentioned them
already.
We want to make our country or the world a happier place and do
it in a broad systematic way.
We can't, it's hard to make people exercise, it's hard to
make people meditate or keep gratitude journals, right?
We probably want to legislate those things.
We can legislate a higher minimum wage, we can legislate
getting rid of right to work laws, we can have a more
generous welfare state, we can do all kinds of things which would
move the United States at least towards Denmark.
The right to work law, this expression became tainted because
of course now it's associated with union busting and that
statistic just out which shows that in states with those so-called
right to work laws, the average income is much lower
significantly.
And so it's happiness.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So.
I would still be worried about the causal argument, if you
think I may say.
So these are correlations, there are so many things moving
at home.
There are causal studies, there are studies on giving cash donations
to people in the so-called third world.
So these are small things of course.
Johannes Halswofer, there are serious states.
I have no doubt about the cash transfers, that's a very
different issue from social security which I'm all in
favor of.
It's a whole different story.
There are amount of things that move with social security,
the understanding, so it's huge.
So one thing is to give cash to kids and all sorts of things
increase, happiness increase, the drinking of the father
increase, by the way typically in those studies the father is
not the mother's.
You keep it to the mother's because the father's drinking.
And they're happy, of sure by the way.
So I'm not saying that I don't buy.
How long are you going to start?
Completely in favor, I would just, you know, as a academic stress
aspect, that it's very easy to do the causal arguments here
in particular because they make sense, in particular because
we all tend, many of us tend to think that, you know,
social security is a good thing.
We can imagine easily how we'd be happier in a place with more
security in a place with less security.
We don't always account for the costs of these issues in our
argument.
So the point I'm trying to make is it's easy to do this.
The same argument says make sure that nobody has kids.
I'm not sure you want to do that.
The causal argument, no, I did the kid's argument.
I did the example before exactly because of this because the
causal argument is difficult now.
No, you actually get very close to hearing at least that the wrong
people shouldn't have kids.
We are this close to hearing that on the national TV.
So don't put that up as a joke because it's not a joking matter
anymore.
It used to be a joking matter maybe 30 years ago.
It's not a joking matter.
Right, I'm not sure.
But in any case, that's obviously not the sense in which I meant it.
It's an example about not using causal arguments when you don't
have causal studies, especially in situations of this sort where
people are not able to do that.
At least between outside of the people you have in mind now,
at least between reasonable people, we all tend to be on the same
side, which is all social security.
So that's just what I'm saying.
Just a word of caution.
There is no neuroscientific way of measuring that.
I wish I was.
But you know, MRI studies are happy people versus not.
Well, you know, people have approached it.
There are the studies of people that have couples that are in
deep love.
They just fell in love with what's happening to their brain.
But that just shows all the reward centers get activated.
Your motivational centers get activated.
That doesn't help you define happiness itself.
So we're still at the same point we were at the beginning here.
How do you define happiness?
Coming back to the point you raised with the sort of
tangentially, would we want anybody else to be able to tell us
whether we're happy or not?
I think we're all in agreement quite that, right?
So we would want to resist some kind of external standard.
I think I was getting at something a little different from that.
Let me give you a composite clinical example.
A psychoanalytically speaking.
A wife insists that her husband come for a consultation because
she thinks he's unhappy.
So this may be a maternalistic attitude here.
And he comes in and he says, I'm perfectly happy.
I don't have any problems.
And over the course of the consultations, he's complaining
about this, he's complaining about that.
And he doesn't connect it with any sense that he's unhappy.
The consultation continues and you discover something about a
parent who was chronically depressed and unhappy all the time.
The wife's pain?
No, the pay...
That's right.
Obviously that...
That was good.
They also...
So, you know, the question was, was there something that didn't allow
this man to recognize how unhappy he was that it was such a dangerous
identification with an impaired parent?
So, it's not about things like a red shirt because, you know, for most
people, a red shirt is not a conflictual issue.
But when something is more deeply conflictual, what can you say
about the degree of veracity of someone's self-report?
I mean, I don't have the answers to that, but I think it's something
worth thinking about.
That's exactly how I reacted to the imagining of no question
of state in neuroscience, because, I mean, of course, there are other
methods you can go with psychoanalysis, but the whole point is
exactly this, which is...
It doesn't seem so obvious to me that the only thing you can look at
are the conscious states, that the only thing you should measure is
how happy people to tell you they are, because there's all sorts of
other things.
People might hide it, might...
Exactly.
So, it'd be, in general, important to try and, you know, again,
this goes back to theorizing, trying to understand various
aspects of, you know, components, theoretically, components of
happiness, so that you can hopefully try and measure them,
measure them separately, right?
So...
But I think what you're raising to just speaks to limitations of
polling people using that as the only measure, and you obviously
want to check that against some of the more objective measures that
are out there to see if, you know, people are reporting that they're so
happy, but their suicide rates are, you know, drastically increasing,
or, you know, because there is this sort of cross-cultural problems
with this, too, right?
That Western countries, where we fix it on happiness, we're very good at
reporting it, and we're constantly trying to brag about how happy we are.
Eastern countries where the suicide rates are lower, but they don't
have this fixation on individual happiness.
Just kind of here, because there's no...
You can define the suicide rate with the gutless single person, right?
So...
Yeah.
There's a bit of the...
But in other countries where they report happiness levels much lower.
That's exactly the issue with the aggregation, right?
Right.
And with regard to seeing red or not, or to being happy or not,
I think the level of his question was a single person,
what the person feels, not what the aggregate of our country is, right?
It sounds too...
But I think the same limitation applies, whether it's on a large level or a
small level.
The question is how much should we take people's word at happiness,
and if you were taught by your mother or your country that your
happiness doesn't matter, or that you should be so happy and you are so happy
and your life is so great, obviously that's going to be reflected in your
self-report.
Right.
And that's again why there's a limit to...
I mean, we theorize in philosophy about this stuff, but there's a limit to the
social scientific data, how good it is and which is why economists hate this
stuff.
Makes sense, because it is sort of all over the place.
And some of these psychological studies are not well done and not...
That's why it has to be cross-disciplinary effort.
That's the neuroscientist, psychologist, computer scientist,
political scientist, psychoanalysts.
So we have...
Everyone at this table with me is exactly yes.
You want to go to the question?
Please line up and state your name and come on up to the microphone here,
line up and please keep your statements in the form of a question.
Thank you.
Hi, my name is Catherine.
Can more be said about the happiness of women in the 50s?
And does it conflict with the idea that children are not a source of happiness?
Some total of what I know is that there's a general pattern.
A bunch of articles recently asking the question, why is the happiness advantage
of women disappearing?
So you see all kinds of data over time.
In the 80s, women were clearly happier than men now on average.
It's just a little bit happier.
Why that is, I don't know, I'll leave that to someone else.
But that's the basic trend, which I think everybody agrees on.
I think my understanding of some of it, and it speaks to...
I mean, in the 80s, our wage differential was even greater.
Now we're making...
I mean, we're still 70 or 80 cents to the man, but it's clearly better.
So a lot of the trends for women in the object of men are clearly better.
Men are doing more in the house.
Men are helping out more.
Why are we getting less happy?
And I think some of the data I've seen is, again, it's partly expectations that girls today grow up.
Being told, you can do whatever you want.
You're equal to men.
Yet we still don't make the same money.
And clearly, there are so many signs that it's not that way.
And then I think the other problem that keeps women back and doesn't keep men back
is the whole managing of work, life, and more women work now.
And the fact that you have to balance these two things,
and American corporations do nothing to help us, we're very little.
I mean, some do some things, but it's not enough.
And I think that women feel the stress much more than men, even men who are about.
And I think women still...
The studies that I've seen, again, women still do more in the house,
even though we all do much less overall.
Women still do more for the kids, even though men contribute more.
And so I think that all of that affects our happiness.
Are there any studies being done on present day full-time homemakers,
women having children alone?
Probably, aren't they?
I'm not familiar with it.
I don't know that it is specific, but women are happier.
Still, a little bit happier than men.
I mean, they were very happy.
They're still happier than men on it.
No, I think there's a lot of people...
Of course, one of the reasons why this kind of literature is a problem
is that you tend to give the explanations that you like,
and you tend to go for course issues that you like.
So a very right-wing person would say women should be in the house,
they were in the house and they were happy.
I'm a very reasonable person, would say women thought they had to be in the house,
and so they were very happy because they had reached whatever.
They had told them it was their potential.
While now, of course, women have much more ambitious goals,
and it's true that they are taken back by society from achieving these goals.
So then, of course, then disconnect.
But very hard to...
How would children's happiness be infected by this?
Are there changes, like a mother's happiness?
I don't know if anybody knows.
I've never seen any study correlating the happiness of mothers or fathers with the kids.
That is actually a very good point that I hope somebody is done,
but I don't know what they're doing.
Thank you.
I'm sorry, on that point, I don't know any specific studies either,
but there is a lot of work done on network analysis
where you can connect my happiness to the people that I know and the people that they know.
So you can find out that the example in the article was that your happiness will go down
if you have a friend who has a friend who's unhappy.
So I imagine the relationships between children and mothers and other people are quite strong.
Great, thank you.
My name is Sharon.
Happiness is a choice.
It actually can be a learned skill.
What can be done to help teach people how they can be happy?
For instance, everyone here is a victim of all sorts of horrible things,
and everyone here is also in the recipient of some very nice things
where you choose to put your focus, determines how happy it will be.
I think a lot of people can learn the skill of happiness,
and I think it also is very much tied to gratitude.
Is there any effort to teach people who are unhappy that they can be happier?
At a general level?
In a general level?
I think the answer is no.
I totally agree with you.
I think it is a large part of choice
and how you view all the great things that have come
versus all the difficult things that have come
really helps define how you are dealing with your life stress.
I think that it would be great if we added this component to education.
It's not a radical view.
It's a way of looking at the world, and I agree with you.
I think it would be better.
But is it done?
No.
I think it's a very important answer that you are giving with the proportion of variance,
explained by personal traits versus choice traits.
I think we only have in our control maybe 10% of the variance.
With regard to being or not being happy, so to a large part, like I would say,
90% you are incorrect in your assumption that it's all up to us.
Who is us?
You are your physical body.
What you are is your physical body.
The level of hormones circulating in your blood right now
determined to a certain extent your perception.
The working of your brain cells determined to a certain extent your perception.
Nobody is there apart from your body.
But you can't.
Once we realize that, once we realize that, we will get to a place where we should be able to devise better interventions.
As opposed to coasting on this wave of imagined freedom,
we are not free to the extent that you are assuming.
But the studies of mindset and psychology have shown how strongly our ideas about how we view the world,
how we view what we've eaten or how much exercise the placebo effect really affect our physiology.
It's the mind, body connection.
So I think that's how I interpret your question and that's how I answered in terms of yes,
there's growing evidence that there is a strong link and if we can influence mindset in the way that psychology studies have been done,
then we do have a very powerful way to be able to help people deal with unhappiness to get towards more happiness.
That's my question.
Can I have a quick point?
There's this whole field of positive psychology that takes up exactly what you're saying.
Train yourself to be happy regardless of the circumstances of your life.
Obviously that's a good thing to do. You mentioned gratitude.
There's all kinds of evidence that keeping gratitude, journals and focusing on gratitude, all that stuff really does make people happier.
So you can find lots of self-help books on doing that which are not complete psychobabble.
But I think the main point comes back to where does happiness ultimately come from?
Some scholars want to think that it's purely an internal mental process and the way you are describing,
that you can make yourself happy if you just know how to or try.
But I think most of us think that happiness is primarily due to things that happen to you
and the circumstances of your life which are beyond your control.
If you live in Aleppo, you're not going to be very happy.
If you're a quadriplegic, you're not going to be very happy.
If you're poor in the United States, you're not going to be very happy.
And I think that those people can also learn to be happy.
To some point, I agree.
I acknowledge biochemical issues that do happen for some people.
But yes, I...
It's a good question.
Hi. My question is about how your view on happiness change through the spiritual lens.
For instance, you talk about happiness as relative to other people, as transient.
Today you have a house. Tomorrow your neighbor has a bigger house so your happiness is gone.
I doubt that will stay when you study about happiness amongst the monks, about amongst the priest.
There must be something changed when you look at happiness through the spiritual lens.
So we'd love to hear what you're thinking about that.
Are you just people out happy?
That's just everywhere.
So what can we learn about happiness?
I don't know. I would...
I would think it's not.
I would go back to the kids again. I'm not sure.
No, I wouldn't go back to the kids.
But they're just people that are happy.
I would go back to mindset that the monks and spiritual people have a particular mindset that I don't care whether I have a big house.
I have a belief in something that is beautiful and that helps me get through whatever comes.
I think that is mindset when psychologists are starting to suffer.
Why they call it the Opium for the masses.
What?
That's why they call it the Opium for the masses.
That's right. That's right.
And there's definitely truth to that.
People on Opium are happier too.
I'm not joking.
Actually, it's obvious to me too.
So the view that happiness is relative and that happiness is transient.
It's only true in the practical lens when you apply the spiritual lens.
Those criteria are attributes are not applied.
But you can't eat spiritualism or you can't eat faith.
Most of us are going to have our lives determined by the extent to which our needs as human animals are met.
And monks may be very commendable and great role models, precisely because they can get past that.
But 99.99% of people will never be monks.
So I admire what you're saying and agree with you.
But I think as a political scientist, I think how to help the world, making us all monks is infeasible.
There is a sense in which you can think of the question a different way, which is we typically think again in terms of linear regressions where you take somebody whose religious are the things equally happier.
But then between religious people, the rich guys are happier than the poor guy, he would say the equation.
Now, if that's not the case, if there are nonlinearities there, I don't know that people have looked at that.
But that's kind of interesting.
What she's saying is that if you are religious, how much condition of the fact that you're a region, the wealth or income or other variables enter less strongly.
And that might be true. I actually don't know that that's true.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Hi.
Hello.
My name is Yolanda Merchant.
I'm an artist.
And I'm going to somewhat pierce your bubble altogether.
Because according to the Dalai Lama, we are born with a disposition.
And like fish, we're born either with a, I would use the word happy or content disposition or a miserable disposition.
And the way that he reflects on that is someone who goes to a terrible tragedy with a more positive disposition,
reverts back to that fairly quickly, even though it could be jail time.
You know, I don't know if he talks about the Holocaust, but something quite devastating.
So I guess my question is, you know, if that's a given that we have a certain mindset, we have very little control over that.
Although I agree with, you know, meditation and prayer and other ways to bring peace and calm.
My second reflection on what you're talking about is with regard to the wife that thinks her husband is unhappy or they're all these circumstances.
That would, you know, reflect that he should be a very unhappy person.
I guess reverting back to the philosophy of meditation.
If you live in the moment, if you wake up and you're happy in your being because you're having a nice coffee, you know, happens to be a pleasant day.
You happen to live in New York City.
You know, that's where you are at that moment. And reflecting on it is, you know, you may feel well within your body and within yourself.
To have other people impose or project, you know, you should be a millionaire.
You, you know, should be traveling to whatever Venice.
Those are other people imposing their reality or as people who meditate, you know, say that's projecting.
So you're not really being in the moment. You're absorbing the moment.
So to my popping the bubble and also to other people imposing their definition of content or happiness.
I thought we all agreed that that's the one thing we all agreed about that we shouldn't do.
What was that? I'm sorry.
I'm sorry. At one point in the conversation, I asked everyone to agree that the one thing we all agreed about was that we shouldn't be imposing our idea of happiness on other people.
That there's no external standard by which to judge happiness.
Right.
Just two points about what you said. And I could correct me if I'm wrong, but I think New Yorkers of the moment, the least happiest in the nation.
I think we're like 49 out of 50 New York, New Jersey and Connecticut with the bottom three typically.
So we're actually less happy here than everywhere else in the country.
I don't know. It changes.
So we, I think we only beat New Jersey actually. I think Connecticut beats us.
And to your point about, again, my understanding is that we have this polyana complex.
So we typically as a whole actually see our lives as better than they are. And all of this sort of biases we have.
We view ourselves as better, smarter, better drivers than in reality we actually are.
So most, it's hardwired in. It's not something that, you know, so most people have a disposition to be optimistic, not pessimistic,
contrary to what they may say or what you may think. It's not the case.
We're actually as a whole are fairly resilient, very resilient actually.
We recover very nicely from a lot of, you know, things and adversities and whatnot.
And we actually are optimistic about things more so than.
Any feedback on the Dalai Lama?
Yeah, he's wrong. I'm very sorry, but he's just wrong.
It's not true. It's not true that, so let me,
let me be a little bit clear on what I meant.
So I think it's correct that there are individual effects so that, you know, I might be on average.
Other things equal, less happy than you are.
If that's the statement that I'm sure it's correct.
It is not correct that I will stay at this level more or less along my life independent on what happens.
That's not correct.
So I might always be, I might be incredibly richer than she is, but, and always less happy because I have a disposition to be less happy.
That's okay, but be much happier than I would be not being rich or not being, or being stressed or anything.
Of course psychological research, tons of psychological research on this.
Sonia Lubomirsky is the first name he is.
She's one of the many who shows that people have a set level for happiness.
And then the so-called hedonic treadmill that you run up, up, up, and don't get anywhere sees to eat that you, if you get an up, a boost, the boost is temporary, and you return to your set level.
Well, I understand that these would mean that everything we've spoken about today is completely irrelevant because there would be no variation on their size.
No, yes, that's exactly what it means.
With regard to the set level, there is a certain range of possible variation.
So there is an individual effect, and that's it, that's the whole point.
There is an individual effect, of course there is an individual effect, but outside effects have an effect on happiness.
But I think the light on actually was correct in assessing the percentage where the set point is and how much intervention people are.
Oh, that might be.
There are individual effects, I don't, I'm not saying anything.
I'm just saying it's not true that, you know, these effects are, the other effects are transitory, it's just not.
At least if we trust our measurement now, you know, you might have a different definition of happiness, I don't have a different definition of happiness, but if we stay with the definition of happiness we have, that's not true, right?
That's not the case.
Sorry.
That's going to save time.
I'm baddie, usually I am not comfortable speaking in front of a group, but I couldn't resist.
I am a woman of the 50s.
I do have some comments.
Number one, we didn't know how we felt.
We really, no one cared, and to my knowledge, no one ever asked.
And I was part of the generation of IBM, I've been moved.
Husbands would make a decision, come home and tell his wife.
Companies would say how to approach it in talking to your wife.
You could live two years in one place, travel to a state halfway across the country, maybe three years.
And the men today, and I have sons and five grand sons, and a lot of what they do now with their wives has to do with their mothers, who didn't, a husband who didn't know how to turn on the washing machine, whose mother had ironed his under shorts,
who never ironed, who would travel, come home, set standards or null and void, something that had happened with one of the children.
So I do know, and when we talked, we talked to each other, and we were reading books, Gloria Steinem, and then, and I thought, usually I wouldn't say this, a book that a woman wrote about reading your husband,
or a new or with whipped cream on you.
I tell you, we didn't know where we stood.
So that's my comment.
I'm Woody Walther, I'm a psychoanalyst, and my comments have to do both with the clinical work that we do, and whether or not we enhance our patient's happiness, a pretty key issue that
this has been more macro happiness, you might say, and less micro.
And I think that it's interesting that some research on dynamic therapy, especially done by Leborski in Philadelphia, showed that when people went through psychotherapy, there was an increased balance of positive experiences that they had, as opposed to negative ones.
And you mentioned the reward center, and the connection between reward centers and happiness, and it does seem reasonable to think about that.
The other thing that's related to that, two other things that I'd be interested in, you guys, comments, is the role of meaningful life, and what your goals are, and how much that seems to have to do with people's lives.
And the related thing is unconscious issues versus consciousness, which is what we deal with every day in the office.
There's the whole group called the Mount Zion Research Group out in San Francisco that studied the patient's unconscious plan when they come into treatment.
What is it that they are trying to resolve, and how do they bring it into the transference, and how do you work with it?
So there's quite a lot that has a very clinical aspect, it seems to me, that we want to think about more.
Can I ask you, are you trying to make your patients happier?
What part of your goal for the patients that you see is to make them happier?
Actually, I think it's a great question. I personally believe that if you want to have a practice, you bloody better way of trying to make your patients happier.
So I think that it's a central issue to what is it that's making them unhappy, to clarify that, to help them to clarify it, and to do something that used to be sort of foreboding, to give advice even,
to say, if you're afraid to do X, Y, and C to get to this goal that you would really like to get to, and we need to clarify what keeps you from trying.
I had a patient just this week where the issue is his father hadn't done that well.
So every time he started to really do well, and he's a very gifted guy, he had to find some excuse to get away from the potential success, because it made him feel bad to separate himself from his father who was actually unhappy.
So, can I comment on that?
My wife, I'm very, very happy to be married to a psychotherapist, and she reports that about half of the clients that come the first session, she makes a point of asking them, what would you like to see the end of this process, and they say we want to be happier, I want to be happier.
Nice to say. How can I help you?
Hi, Michael. I love the subject so much for that for the past couple of years, a couple of times a month, I run a happiness discussion group with all people who want to discuss all things happening. So that's happening right after this.
If those want to talk on that, and my question is about the whole study and talk of your happiness being a function of the five people you spend the most time with, of the five people you kind of keep in mind the most.
I'm wondering if people on the panel had any thoughts on that particular study or anything having to do with that.
Those are difficult things to do because there's a selection problem.
So, you choose the five people you spend time with.
So, do you choose happy people because you're happy or do you choose unhappy or are you happy and unhappy people make you unhappy. So these are things that are essentially impossible to identify.
So, very hard.
Any other thoughts?
Ideas about that particular.
Okay, and just as like a final comment, the lady in red that brought up spirituality, I guess my my thought on spirituality, I think it's your ability to create sensitivities arises which allows you to be more in touch with subtleties and sub subtleties, which allows you to have a more
wider spectrum of feelings, thoughts, ideas, open-mindedness, and the results of all this is connectedness with all things. So I think there is a lot of value in spirituality.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
I have a question and it's about meaningfulness in life and to have to lead no life. It's not extraordinary but meaningful to you and about the women in the 50s. I'm the class of 50, went Stanford about a five-day key and was very
difficult. It was a difficult life and I woke up going to it. My husband committed suicide after we divorced but got into real trouble and I was very naive, did not know many things. But I want to know, my mother would always say, I don't know why you're unhappy and this is for the
gentleman from Italy and then I married the lawyer who was from Italy. This was a big mistake. I went from one extreme. I went from one extreme to the other, one that was very dismissive but my mother would always say, but he doesn't go out with other women and he doesn't drink. I was so lucky.
I'm just wondering how can we recognize the fact that all of our lives should have meaning no matter whether we come.
I'm sorry. No matter whether we come very ambitious or very laid back or whatever our nature. I don't know who talked about nature but I thought that was a very interesting thing to contemplate.
But I don't know, was it here to Mr. Nazarian or Dr. Nazarian that we said there were cultures that there was no such word as happiness. Was that here or was it not here? But it was a seminar and there was no such word as anyway.
And I guess that's it. Thank you very much. Can I make one little comment? There's a great book by a historian named Darren McMahon who talks about the history of happiness.
History of happiness. History of happiness. That's the name of his book I think. One of the things that he stresses which has always been on my mind too is that happiness is a post enlightenment construct in some ways.
People like Aristotle talk about happiness but he didn't think any of us were going to be it. I think the blurb for this presentation began with only the only happy man is a dead man.
So there's a lot of reason to believe that what we think of as happiness involving choice and someone in our lives are lives being motivated by the pursuit of happiness is the result of the enlightenment, the French Revolution, the American Revolution,
and that fundamentally as weird as it may sound the people before us may not have had a word for happiness but it wasn't part of what they expected from their lives.
Happiness is what you got maybe when you were dead but they didn't have the privilege living subsistence lives and stuff like that.
Even a subsistence culture where people were very poor but they all had a role and they all had a sense of satisfaction in playing that role.
Possibly they certainly had a role but that's exactly the whole role they didn't have any choice.
They didn't see it. Oh they didn't have a choice you're right.
Well there's a book I'm reading now and it's called Why Philosophy Never Goes Away.
And it's written by Rebecca Newberger Goldstein. Why Philosophy Never Goes Away.
And it's very interesting is why were they happy and what made them miserable and what made us miserable that they accepted.
And we just want to be happy but you know confusing but if you could talk about that.
I'm Alex. It's a really excellent conversation today.
I'm really grateful and surprised that the social and macro elements of happiness were discussed so thoroughly and deeply.
A complicated issue that I find myself running into is in whatever rebel rousing or radicalizing or addressing the political crises of our times I find myself in the thick of.
You know concerning myself with the happiness of the population seeing the extent to which institutions that are poorly thought out and to the benefit of a few decrease the happiness of so many.
And I find myself becoming unhappy when I think about all these things.
And I think that this is often a distillama that people face. They're like okay so I know there's all this bad news out there.
I know that there are actually steps to take and groups to join and solidarity to express and realize how do people work through that specific dilemma of being an individual in the midst of a world that needs institutional change to actually increase everyone's happiness.
Knowing that all of our happiness is connected but also having to be happy enough myself that I'll actually be a good instrument raising all that happiness.
Any of your reflections on that would be welcome.
When I give talks on happiness people always ask me what's so great about being happy or are we losing only a fool wants to be happy or only the selfish want to be happy.
For the reasons you just described that I guess the question I always asked back to them was was Gandhi unhappy into the Dalai Lama unhappy.
But obviously people deeply committed to social change and the welfare of others but where they.
Does that mean you have to be miserable. I mean I guess I hope at least that those people are exemplars of how we can be committed to making the world a better place and and worry about other people but at the same time leaving lives that we find not only meaningful but happy.
As many as that is one that shows that when you are altruistic and give something to others that's one of the easiest ways to activate your own reward system and you have to think especially in life or comment that that might be an evolutionarily developed kind of kind of response.
So give to others and that might make you feel happy and help everybody else at the same time.
My name is Charles Markovski. I'm a psychiatrist and I'm very happy I'm here today.
Most stimulating conversation. What I'm struck by is the absence of discussion of depression which seems to me is the opposite number of happiness.
And as a clinician it's at least been my experience that overwhelmingly the work I do deals with people suffering with depression. Many of whom are actually not cognizant on the fact that they have depression.
It's presents in a myriad of ways very often hidden from the patient themselves. And what I want to ask is how you would integrate the fact that some of the people who suffer with depression cannot fight their way out of it no matter how they try.
And that somatic treatments particularly medications are become relevant to the treatment and to the management of their happiness or lack of it.
And I just wonder if how that sort of fits with your thinking as up to now.
I just answered the wrong question. I don't quite buy the distinction but to a certain extent one can speak about the body versus the processes that make use of it.
It still depends on it completely. And certain disorders are just too deep to be as I'm sure you know you just said that much to be amenable to an intervention merely by talk. I mean it's a miracle in some sense that the talk saying cognitive behavioral setting can get you as far as it can.
It's fantastic. Think of it. You know you someone reaches down inside your brain or you yourself do so and change things change the electrical impulses in the chemical balance because it's all about this.
As I said before I'll say it again. It's nothing beyond the chemical balance and the electrical impulses. That's what you are.
And so to some extent you can change that from the outside by talk. I mean right now I'm causing immediate early gene expression in your brain. I mean genes get some get transcribed others do not because I talk to you so I'm making changes in your brain.
I know I can only reach luckily for you. I can only reach this far not farther for some of the things in the psychiatry school prescribed for you something more serious than just talk.
I think it depends on the value of unhappiness. I think there's some interesting research on this by psychiatrists who feel that we are over medicating people that it's too quick of a solution to say oh you're not happy let's give you some you know prozac or whatever the drug of choice is
and well but so I think it depends on the cause of you know are you talking about somebody who's clinically depressed who clearly it's not related to the conditions of their life. It's you know postpartum depression it's something that is clearly uni medication but that's not everybody who's on medication today.
In fact it's not even the majority right because the rates of I mean the rates they show of you know the people suffering from clinical depression have remained road to end schizophrenia and these other diseases that require these heavy duty drugs.
Have remained relatively stable yet the drug doesn't correlate at all.
Siric polemies other really serious drugs are being prescribed to people who are saying well I have a little trouble sleeping I'm not you know I'm not feeling so great.
Oh let's get you on some medication.
Social problem that's like you know like the army answering 911 call which is what happening in our cities right.
You should I mean the first line of defense should be psychotherapists who talks to you know the psychiatrist prescribed drugs.
Exactly and they show that the combination of both is obviously more effective than you know for for some people it's you know they need the talk therapy even if they need the drugs.
So I mean there's a case that I remember reading about in one of these where they were and they were there's a whole study now of the evolutionary benefits of depression again not that sort of pathological clinical depression but the idea that when you
ruminate on your problems and you pull away from pleasurable you're not experiencing pleasure so you're not with your friends you're not having sex you're not eating you're focusing on your problems and you're solving them better than if you were getting pleasure out of these things
so they're clearly evolutionary benefits to not being happy with your life at the moment which force you to reexamine reevaluate and figure out what's wrong.
There was a case that in one of these articles by one of these psychiatrists of a patient of his who was on you know was doing very well on antidepressants and then finally came back to him and said I want to go off the antidepressants
and he said oh but they're working well for you know what what's what's the problem and she said the problem she goes are you are you they're not working or are you are you not happy anymore.
And she said no she said the reason I want to go off of them is because I feel fine but I'm still married to the same alcoholic SOP and I realize that it's not that my problem.
It's my life problem and although I feel fine I'm not happy that I feel fine and I want to go off the medication in order to fix my life.
So I just want to make one quick point I think clearly there's over treatment with drugs but there's under diagnosis of depression so that's sort of a curious paradox.
And a quick point in agreement there's over treatment but under diagnosis and if we're going to treat depression or happiness or in that sense as a social problem as opposed to something that only the privileged are privileged to.
We have to begin with a healthcare system that provides everybody with access which helps diagnose them and helps them get treatment so sorry.
I have to check to.
Hi I'm Samuel.
I'm not really a speaker in front of crowds either but Betty gave me the inspiration so even though I'm not a woman from the 50s.
I enjoyed this conversation very much. One of the things that one of the reasons why it didn't speak to me so much is because I'm a part of what I think is not an insignificant number of people in this class of young pretty well educated.
I don't have many real anxieties financial issues but still I don't have data to support this but I sense that there's still a great sense among sort of maybe my generation of a sense of like unfulfillment or emptiness.
I think part of it has to do with to echo some of what psychotherapist said but I'm not sure what it really means to pursue a meaningful life or how to choose to pursue a meaningful life but I'm not convinced that one of you said that a better work life balance
would necessarily help. I'm not convinced that more time watching Netflix or prozing Facebook or lying on the beach would necessarily help that.
I think part of one of the flaws I think in this conversation is sort of this assumption or this methodology of if I achieve X then I'll be happy. And then the problem with happiness is we have to manage our expectations.
If only X wasn't so great or you know we weren't on this in this paradox or this hedonic treadmill or whatever. And I think sort of this problem is probably exacerbated by social media and technology that sort of give us this same type of promise
that you know if you look like this or if you buy this or if you have this then you'll be happier than you know because they're dictating what success means and what happiness should look like.
So I guess if you have any thoughts on that I'm not sure exactly what my question or I guess if you want to pinpoint the question I guess it's you know do you think in the age of social media and this heavy heavy advertising and stuff like that
the pursuit of happiness is even more difficult.
I have a couple of kids you won't think about.
There's a meaning for you. Yeah. I'm not being so good if you have kids you have meaning therefore you don't have time to worry about the lack of fulfillment that you just described.
Right.
Exactly.
Thank you for your audience.
Hi my name is Olga and thank you very much for very interesting conversation I have a lot of questions but I can even ask all of them.
For me it's very interesting why happiness became so big figure in American mythology like American freedom or democracy and for example in the Soviet Union we didn't talk about happiness at all we talked about meaning in life,
meaningful life and the creating but a future but not happy future but a future.
And it was different mythology and but what I would like to talk about I recently read about theories psychological theory by psychology professor.
In Colorado June.
Grover she wrote an article missing the standing of positive thinking and what she is she comparing our mind with ecological system and talking about biodiversity and diversity of emotions.
And she's saying that we know that in the physical ecosystem by diversity is healthy and important people can buy into that we know that biodiversity was just was just resistance to pathogens and invasive species.
And that human mind may be not so different and that's it's important to have a diversity array of emotions joy sadness love admiration guilt and so on.
So would you yes would you comment on your statements.
She sounds like she was right but not for the reasons that that you recounted.
I think it's irresponsible to make for scientists to make an analogy basis for an argument because analogy is not valid argument.
You know saying like the mind is like the ecosystem from that point on everything you say is completely up in the air.
But it so happens I think this came up that in this discussion here that sometimes less than happy states can be more adapted for the individual.
This is not ecosystem and because sometimes there might be need for focus or whatever. So to that extent I would agree with that.
There is some very good psychological research published in the best journals psychological science I think you read mouse is one of the authors on the value of unhappiness and I know that Christine here wrote you did the deal right about that so there are people here more qualified
than I can speak to that but it's like you say.
Yeah, my name is Doug I'm a financial planner and you know money is very quantifiable.
I think I'll agree happiness is not and a lot of the prevailing thought when you're working financial services that people make these huge financial decisions based on two emotions fear agreed.
And it seems my experience is a whole lot deeper than that.
But you know I'm not a psychiatrist a lot of psychiatrists are not financial planners so we can't really have that overlap and a lot of the books that I've read you know you get halfway through it and you realize oh this is a training manual on how to sell
a newity to someone. So how do you kind of get people to open up up about their relationship with money. How does that impact their happiness. You know if you have any thoughts on that I would greatly appreciate it.
And then watch me because I'm the economist. I always don't know don't some Congress don't have any things with money. I'm one of them.
No I don't think people I mean really I don't think people have looked that deep.
The issue of the relationship the psychological relationship that people have with money and how that can affect financial plans. It's it's a very interesting question. I really don't know.
I really don't know anybody who's that honest.
There are psychologists that work in psychologists and economists that work in related questions but that's a specific question.
I think it's a very interesting question. We've heard quite a few actually.
I think that would be interesting to go and look at and this one but I can write a book.
As you helped people make these decisions based based on you know what is it what's motivating is this a right.
Yeah it's what's the motivation what's the end goal in mind and you know is it something you feel that you need to do or something that you want to do.
So it's a good question to you.
Yeah and it's more it's more a question how do I unlock that thinking in their head.
I think I would advise you to cite Tolkien to them from the Lord of the Rings.
You know when when the gimli the dwarf asks of glad me of a gift.
I will not go into details what the gift was but she tells him that with the gift go those words that your hands will flow with gold but over your gold will have no dominion.
Not the bad advice.
Yeah I think.
Help me yet.
Thanks a lot.
Hi I don't have a question I kind of just want to make a statement which seems to work for me and that and that's what attracted me to this conference the name happiness.
I'm also a psychoanalyst but that's not why I'm here.
My philosophy is that contentness is what's important to be content was what you have.
Happiness of those special times in life when whether it's love in the beginning or birth of a child or whatever we all know what those moments are.
If we were happy meaning happy all the time we really wouldn't know that we're happy.
It's just like if we were drinking champagne and eating caviar all the time we wouldn't know it's special.
So that's basically my comment for today.
Thank you.
Any comments?
Allow me to give Sophocles the final word.
The final chorus from the Antigone where he said of happiness the crown and chief is part is wisdom and to hold the gods in awe.
That is the law that seeing the stricken heart pride brought down we learn when we are old.
Thank you to all of our discussions today.
