When we talk about free will and when we get really heated debates over that, what we're
actually talking about is human behavior.
If we all held the exact same idea and it was the wrong idea, that would be detrimental.
And so having this debate and having ideas kind of develop it is the thing we want to
do.
In the late 80s, early 90s, I came to realize that people from the different areas of neuroscience
psychology, biology didn't really talk to each other.
And it seemed to me that's a major loss because each of them had something to say that could
be useful to the other.
The first round table we had actors, philosophers, neuroscientists.
I invited them to my home.
I served them dinner and wine.
Then we went to my living room and what I recognized was that these meetings in and
some of them themselves were extremely enlightening.
And so that's where Helix comes from.
The mission of Helix is to bring together thought leaders from different disciplines,
speaking with one another in spontaneous a way as possible.
The discussions are not aimed to answer a question because if that were the case, there
would be more homogeneity and you'd have a monolithic group of experts.
And it's just the opposite.
It's more of an intellectual free for all.
It's true in different ways, in different phases of child development.
But what preoccupies a kid at a certain stage in life is going to influence what he
or she actually experiences.
We all know that.
We're in a terrible mood.
If something horrible just happened to us, we misperceive what someone else said.
I don't think we're in some sense moving toward a steady state of objectivity.
You disagree?
Go ahead.
I think you never get to a stage of objectivity.
There's no such thing.
But I think kids are more limited because they have more limited minds.
That's what you get in an interdisciplinary conversation.
You get to realize that there's no one privileged point of view or one privileged kind of information.
So I think it's essential if we're going to understand anything about the world.
I'm a lab scientist.
I'm being a lab scientist, I spend a lot of time in the four walls of my laboratory.
So when you have an opportunity to sit around with colleagues who are coming from very different
perspectives, it changes the way you think about your subject matter in a way that I
hope I will then take back into my laboratory and import some of those different perspectives
into the work that we do there.
We cover a very broad area.
We do neuroscience, biology, medicine.
We have auditory, surrealism.
And there isn't a meeting I walk out of that I haven't learned something.
It's very important to see how carefully the child has made an effort to draw these figures.
And now if we go to the next child's drawing, same age, it's very primitive.
How do you determine the ability of the child drawing against his or her creativity or individuality?
It seems to me you're making an assumption that drawing ability of all children of the
same age ought to be the same.
I'm so glad you made that point.
So what you're suggesting is that that image, which I plead guilty to calling primitive,
could in fact be an amazingly creative expression on the part of the child, who could have possibly
drawn the figure in other ways.
It might not be right to call primitive, it might be right to call it something else.
So I really appreciate that so much.
I plead guilty and I stand corrected.
And I think that's a wonderful contribution.
We had a series on music and cognition.
We asked Nacho Armani, a percussionist, to give a performance where he engaged not only
all the roundtable participants, but the entire audience.
And I think that's a great thing.
So genius requires intelligence, but then there's something else.
And originally the idea was that, you know, the genius, that extra something was breathed
into you by a god or a muse or implanted in you by the gods.
But it was a divine special something that ordinary human beings didn't have.
We submitted an application identifying 14 areas within the big questions about sciences
and humanities.
And we were very pleased for them to fund us for those.
It's when we get puzzling phenomena that is observable physical phenomena that are
current inventory, physical inventory of properties and enforces doesn't seem adequate
to capture that we then have to broaden out our physical understanding.
In the case of consciousness, it's not the behavior of consciousness that leads us to
think we're going to need some new fundamental explanatory principle.
It's the intrinsic character.
Is it epiphenomenal?
Is it such that it's just there?
There's an interesting form of overstatement that scientists are prone to in this, that
we have biology and we have a mechanism by which you can see how random variation plus
natural selection could give you complicated organisms like us.
That's true.
What you often see scientists do is convert that into a very different statement which
is we know that random mutations plus natural selection gave rise to us.
Those are two very distant statements and the second one is completely beyond what we know.
Of course, we don't know that all those mutations were random.
We have no idea.
With the John Templeton Foundation grant, we had one about immortality that I thought
was really enchanting and nerve-racking.
If we were to be able to say on such and such a date, this will be the end of the human
race, what would that do to all human endeavor?
We can accept to a certain extent the fact that we individually, each one of us is going
to end.
But the idea that the entire thing is going to end, all humanity I think is as close to
unthinkable as we can get.
I feel like we've changed a great deal in this recent period of time since modernity
basically.
There are sensibilities that are arising and not just in academic frameworks but in the
popular realm as well that would say it might be possible to accept endings, accept one's
own death, accept the deep uncertainty of our existence, that that might be kind of
cool.
It was just a discussion but you did in some way feel that something really large was at
stake.
There will always be a irreducible degree of unpredictability of human behavior.
Even given all the addictions, even given all the neurological conditions that people
have, there is an element of choice in humans which is inherent to that human for one reason
or another.
These events really democratize the intellectual life in the city.
I think it's very important not to restrict ideas to elites and universities.
We have an audience here and we simulcast it and we put it on YouTube and that way a
lot more people can benefit from it.
A lot of you have been talking about the fact that when we are conscious we have a feeling
inside that we have an experience inside.
So my question is inside what?
Because if we say that conscious experience is inside the mind it's kind of circular
definition because just the thing, so it cannot be literally inside the head.
We do not expect to find consciousness like we find sugar in the blood.
So I just wanted to ask inside what?
Something we haven't really talked at all about which I guess we'll wait until the last
minute to throw it out there is that consciousness is as far as we know embodied.
When I stub my toe I feel pain in my toe, not in my brain and I don't feel it in the
rock that I stubbed my toe against.
There seems to be this deep interface of consciousness that blends into the body even though we've
been talking about it being situated in the brain.
So when you ask the question we've been talking about consciousness being inside what the
first thing I think of is it's inside the body and that gets us out of that immediate
circularity and then you can say well what is the consciousness, the embodied consciousness
inside of and then that's a different question.
Do you think that if given unlimited resources and the ultimate proficiency in algorithms
could we create a machine that's capable of replicating itself enough to become freewheeling?
I really like that each of the panelists really just talked about their own experiences with
the topic and questions from their own approaches and I really gave like a multifaceted understanding
to the questions.
My hope is to provide this to various universities around the country and around the world especially
in lesser fortunate places around the world.
I've always been in favor of independent thinking and critical thinking.
This is a perfect way to bring it to as many people as possible.
These kinds of events remind us all in academia that it is really about relevance of what
we are doing.
It is ultimately the question how do we contribute to the betterment of society or to the greater
good.
The more individuals who can engage in this kind of high quality discussion the more we're
raising not only the awareness but the potential for contributions of people both participants
and non-participants to the greater wisdom and knowledge of the world.
