Okay, we're going to get started.
Welcome everyone.
I'm Rob Penzer.
I'm the associate director of the Helix Center.
Thank you for coming out today for what promises to be a fascinating program on human and
non-human minds.
Before we get to the introductions of today's participants, just have a few announcements.
This is the last of our roundtables for the academic year, and I want to just give you
a little bit of a taste of some of the roundtables coming in the fall.
We're going to start out in September on the subject of interdisciplinary investigations.
Our John Templeton Foundation roundtables continue in October, a standing genius, followed
by genes, computers, and computers in November.
We'll be addressing epigenetics.
We have a new arts and humanities program, and the topic toward the end of November will
be on translation.
Then we're going to have a three-day symposium in December, a Freudian perspective on what
hails the world today, and that will be an international event with participants from
Europe and the states.
Then in mid-December, capital with an A, notions, the future of the American economy.
Then we continue again with the Templeton Foundation-sponsored roundtable on memory,
followed by the meditative state, and then the realm of mystery.
I also wanted to mention that we had a very successful fundraiser on May 8th, and nothing
breeds success like success.
So I hope it might inspire some of you to consider donating to our nonprofit organization
so that we can continue to provide you with such programs, and as always, they are free
and open to the public.
So now, on to today's participants.
To my right is Alexandra Horowitz, professor of psychology at Barnard College, whose dog
cognition lab conducts research on a wide range of topics, including dog, old-fashioned,
interspecies play behavior, and attributions of secondary emotions to dogs.
Among her books are Inside of a Dog, What She Smell and Know, and Unlooking, Eleven Walks
with Expert Eyes.
To her right is Diana Reese, professor of psychology at Hunter College, and professor
of biopsychology and behavioral neuroscience at the Graduate Center of CUNY, whose research
focuses on Sotitian cognition, communication, comparative animal cognition, and the evolution
of intelligence.
She is the author of Secrets of the Dolphins, and the book The Dolphin in the Mirror, Exploring
Dolphin Minds, Dolphin Lives.
To her right is Theodore Diamond, director of the Diamond Instance, joint assistant professor
at Columbia Teachers College, covers the study of the human mental and physical system as
a holistic entity.
Among his books are The Body in Motion, Its Evolution and Design, and Neurodynamics,
the Art of Mindfulness in Action.
To his right, Stuart Fierstein is the former chair of Department of Biological Sciences
at Columbia University, where he studies the vertebrate olfactory system, and he's the
author of the book's Ignorance, How it Drives Science, and Failure by Science is So Successful.
And to his right, it's a research associate in lecture at Harvard University, an author
of the Alex Studies describing over 20 years of peer-reviewed experiments on the cognitive
and communicative abilities of Gray Parrots, X and Me, her memoir of a 30-year collaboration.
Now to our round table.
No, you're going to start it.
You see, that's where we are here.
That's the first question.
Who starts?
This is Ed Nurse-Sassian, the director, but I think most of you know.
It's so typical that we can't get a round table on cognitive.
Diana, you'll start.
Yes.
So I think what we're hoping to do today is talk about, as we advertise, the continuities
and discontinuities between human and non-human animal minds.
And it's wonderful to be here together to do this with you, all of us, and we obviously
encourage discussion, not just us, but you as well.
I think some of the ways we might start this is from a perspective of Darwinian, the continuity
of evolution, emotion, thinking from a Darwinian perspective, as contrasted by a few, Descartes
view that humans had a body, that they also had this ghost in the machine, a thinking
substance of mind.
And again, the view that Descartes had was that other animals only had the body.
They were devoid of this thinking substance.
And I guess I just want to kick in a first idea here to get us going, that for a little
bit, there's been this running debate as to whether other animals think or not.
Of course, I'll just mention this because there were arguments that, well, parrots
certainly are vocal.
They're using words, but it's just a devoid of thought.
And their thought were dismissed.
And I know Irene's going to have a lot to say about that.
And then, you know, other animals are doing behavior that looks complex, but it's not
complex.
It's that.
I think we can just start talking about what some of the things we're learning.
There you go.
You just have to bring the speakers to many of the students in my class.
So, and I mean that only partly as a joke, actually, because I think one of the difficult
issues is, in fact, defining what we mean, first of all, by the idea of continuity and
discontinuity.
We don't look for it.
And how to identify what we consider to be conscious or cognitive behavior, whether there's
anything to do with the is a difference between, I guess, what you would call, programmed behavior
or things like that, or instinctive behavior and more cognitive behavior.
I mean, I don't, I think we know, okay, that's intuitive, whatever.
The dog does something that all dogs do, and that looks intuitive.
And then something is affirmative, but it just looks that way.
It's very difficult to actually, can I tell a quick story actually about this?
It has nothing to do with cognition, but it does have to do with behavior and the idea
of instinct.
So when a bird, not a pigeon, a chicken is born, the very first thing it does when it
gets out of the egg is it begins pecking the ground for food.
Appears to be an instinctive behavior.
For years it was considered an instinctive behavior.
So Japanese scientist whose name now eludes me.
But anyway, Japanese scientist, this is a weird thing to do, I know.
But if you spread Vaseline on an egg and hold it up to the other side and hold it as a light,
it becomes transparent and you can see through it with a light behind it.
I don't know how we discovered that.
That's a whole other story.
I suspect.
But anyway.
So this enabled him to take chicken eggs and put them in an incubator and then he goes
Vaseline and watch the chicken develop.
And that develops, it turns out that the chicken develops in the egg with its head bent over
this way and it's bent directly over the region that becomes the heart.
And at some point about four days before the thing cracks up, it begins beating actually.
I think it's sooner than that, but it's better.
And you watch the head of the chicken go up and down and up and down with the beat of
the heart.
And it comes out of the egg, it just keeps on going up and down and then it kind of binds
up picking up some food and well there you go, right?
So it's not instinctive at all.
It's a behavior that's learned in fact in some way or another.
So I just think that's a problem that's worth discussing, how we make this discriminate.
We say discontinuity versus content.
I don't really know where to draw the lines here.
There's a similar story with Jack Hammond studies on the goals.
I mean people know that goals, parental goals have a little red spot on their beak and supposedly
the chicks come out and stay in that red dot.
It turns out what is instinctual is something like what you're describing a response to
some kind of dates and they happen to hit the red dot at one point and mom and dad barf
up some food and you know there you go.
But it's these things, many of these things people thought were instinctual.
Turns out to have a learning component, to have different aspects, behavioral intuition
plus these other aspects.
So much of what we do in our lab now to look at the effects of context and that's another
issue where we're studying these so many different types of behavior patterns that are exquisitely
sensitive to the context in which you study them.
We did a study where some people were looking at fish behavior.
There's a fish that lives in a reef that a cleaner fish and the other fish that live
in the reef come over and get all the parasites taken off.
But every once in a while another fish comes by and these cleaner fish will jump out and
grab those fish because the local residents they're going to just sit there.
They're not going to come back but you can basically optimize your food intake by jumping
out to these other fish.
So it's too complicated to explain the whole study but based on that people were comparing
chimpanzees and these fish and it turns out a regular task.
The fish outperformed the chimpanzees.
So we looked at this, I worked with parrots and I said, wait a minute, my birds can do
this really easily.
And so we did the task and the parrots outperformed everybody.
But it was the way we set up what we call the initial conditions.
And when you compare exactly how to experiment you're going to find in so many ways different
animals just based on how you set up the experiment.
So this is another thing that people are not sensitive to when they say, well, you know,
this animal does this and this animal.
Can't do this in blah blah blah.
So much of it depends on exactly how you set up the experiment.
I mean, I think that what that highlights and what we're going to highlight is that we're
still trapped in a way of working for us, right?
The instinctive or learning or reflexive versus cognitive.
And the science that drove an interest in non-human animals, which is a psychological
science really, but they wind up being categories that now we're stuck.
We're trying to fit our behavior into one or the other and it'd be the ideal.
Resization of most of the behavior that we're seeing.
I mean, context, the importance of context seems to me to rise above that a little bit.
But somebody will still want you to say, well, is it instinctive or is it learned?
Which might not be easy to.
There are also some other issues, I think, as scientists that we face.
And some of them are, you know, we're stuck looking through this human lens, that other
animal behavior and intelligence.
And, you know, the eyeward, intelligence.
How do you measure that?
Is the intelligence of a dolphin the same thing as the intelligence of a chimpanzee?
I mean, morphologically, they're different.
Very different environments.
They've been separated by 95 million years of separate evolution.
We might expect that they'll do very different things.
And, you know, that to me, that's one of the most challenging things of it.
How do you even think about intelligence in an animal and even know that you're not missing
most of it?
Because simply, they're using different kinds of, you know, ways of thinking.
They have perspectives there in environment we can't imagine.
I'll tell you one story that was very telling to me.
A couple of years ago, one of the doctoral students in my lab pressed in further and
I did a study at the Smithsonian's National Zoo with Elephants.
I joke about saying that I study big gray brains and big gray mammals, elephants and
dolphins.
And so we worked with elephants this time, not dolphins.
And I don't know how many of you are familiar with this study that was done many years ago
by Wolfgang Köhler with showing the first evidence for insightful problem solving in
chimpanzees.
So insightful problem solving has been defined as being faced with a novel problem or situation
and without trial and error.
You come up with, you have sort of this aha moment and you see the solution suddenly,
a sudden, you know, solution, a reorganization of your thinking so you can solve this problem.
So what he did with his attempts is he hung bananas high above their reach and he placed
variety of eggs in their environment.
This was done at a zoo in Tenerife and he gave them, there were some sticks and there
were some boxes.
And you know the chimps, one of them's name was Sultan, you know, I forget the names of
the others, were looking up, obviously couldn't reach it.
And finally, one of the chimps without trial and error apparently stacked the boxes, took
a couple boxes, stacked them up and then took a stick and was able to reach the banana.
And that was sort of the first evidence that a non-human species showed this aha moment,
they sort of got it.
And we were really interested because there had been a lot of discussion about elephants.
Being elephants are big tool users, they're one of the biggest tool users.
But somehow they weren't showing this kind of insightful problem solving when people
gave them sticks to solve problems.
So we went to Smithsonian's National Zoo and we simulated or replicated this curler experiment.
We didn't hang bananas above their reach but we strung up a sort of a clothes line out
of wire and shot out tree limbs, baited with tasty fruit that they would eat.
What we did was we put boxes that they could stack and sticks and wrong.
Well, what we saw was that this elephant never picked up a stick.
Again, in bother he got stuck with his trunk and he didn't know if he didn't know if he
never did it.
But what he did was he went for the block and he, which was much more effort, there was
much more effort involved in this.
He pushed the block right under, got up on the block and got his trunk where the fruit
was.
And it was interesting and he continued and gave him repeated trials where we hid the
block, we moved the block, he had a search for the block.
Once he got it, he got it, he could solve the problem.
But if we had only given him sticks, he may never have shown that.
Well, let's think about this.
So an elephant's trunk is a really cool sensory organ.
First of all, they're optimal vision.
Their best visual acuity is at the end of the trunk.
They have two little points that we call fingers that can pick up something that's a dime so
they can see, touch, smell with this great.
It's not a tool because it's part of their body.
And what they needed to do perhaps is get this cool sensory organ up where the food was
and the stick would have shut off their ability to touch the food, smell the object and perhaps
their visual acuity.
Again, it was at these past experiments where we only gave them sticks and they do.
So again, I think there's a lesson to be learned in some of that.
Maybe a elephant if we can if we're going to test them.
Well, we saw that with the...
Pulling.
So this is a study.
This was developed by Baron Heinrich for work with crows and ravens.
What you do is you have a perch and you put a really long string with a tasty treat on
the bottom.
And he showed this to the ravens and the raven sort of flew over and looked at it and flew
back and flew over and looked at it.
And then again, without any trial and error, reach down, grabbed the string with his beak,
pulled it up, clumped his foot on it and basically reeled it in.
Crows weren't so good at this.
So we thought, hey, we got these brilliant parrots.
Let's try this.
Well, it turned out that the parrots in our lab that had not yet learned to speak did
extremely well on this.
I mean, it took them, you know, ten seconds or so, they figured it out.
Ones that did speak, Alex and Griffin looked at it, looked at us and went, go pick up
nut.
Now...
That's not...
Language is a tool.
But had we done it only with our older, more intelligent parrots, we would have said
they can't figure out how to do the task.
But it wasn't that they couldn't.
It was like, that's not...
You know, we don't do physical work.
You know, we know how to manipulate you to do it.
Well, that actually reminds me a lot of the comparison between wolves and dogs because
on a string pulling task where a string...
The researchers create this convoluted apparatus where there's essentially a ball of old's
meat and... which can open the door and wolves and dogs will learn to pull the string to
open the door.
They both will use their mouth.
But then the researchers make it an impossible task.
In other words, they jimmy it so that it won't open if you pull the string.
And wolves will go up this task, you know, until they wreck the cage.
You know, they'll go at it until they're...
From their gums.
Dogs start to pull at it.
It's not opening.
They pull at it and they stop and look at the handler or the person.
We're sort of the tool who solves the problem for the dogs.
And the question is, which is more intelligent?
The wolves with their persistence?
That's useful in their environment or the dogs with their using us who have hands and
brains which can solve that problem.
Hmm.
I have a question.
Here's a question.
My question is this.
If the dog...
If the elephant has a certain kind of intelligence, if the dog has a certain kind of intelligence,
humans, are they all limited and why?
Why is it that the human intelligence seems unlimited?
Why is it grown to the point it's grown?
I have my own views on this, which I'll say a tiny bit about.
But why is the intelligence that we see in elephants not going to go beyond where it
is?
It's interesting in your example, Dan, because it's almost like the example with the elephant
and the trunk is sort of an example of embodied cognition.
We're applying the stick to an elephant, but it doesn't deal with sticks, where it's chimpanzees
like sticks.
Humans have...
They do use sticks as tools to run themselves, try open things where they don't have to
smell and get to them.
But in this case, it wouldn't necessarily facilitate it.
But what I want to know is why is it that the elephant intelligence doesn't go beyond
that and what happened to humans that somehow led beyond...
I believe it's related to physical design.
I believe that the upright design was sort of the...
Kind of like a breakthrough design that allowed human intelligence to evolve in a completely
different way and lead to an expansion of the brain, a whole set of different behaviors.
But I wonder if the elephant design doesn't allow further development in that direction.
Well, actually, I'd like to switch it in a different way.
I think symbolic representation is one of the critical issues here, because we've done
some studies with our birds on evidence.
And by giving them...
I mean, they don't know the way you and I have language.
I couldn't put Alex on the table here and we couldn't have had the conversation we're
having, okay.
But he had symbolic representation.
My other birds do too.
And they can do numerical tasks that animals without symbolic representation cannot do
at all, all right?
And this seems to be an incredible difference.
And of course, we've given these birds a symbolic representation.
Whatever symbolic representation they have in the wild seems to be much more limited,
okay?
But it's...
That's to me seems to be an incredible difference.
And to me, it seems to be that for humans, we've kind of ratcheted things up by using
you know, symbolics and then thinking things, using the symbols to think things through
and then getting more complicated symbols, et cetera, et cetera.
I guess the question is when does a difference in quantity become a difference in quality?
And where does that ever happen?
So I mean these...
I don't think anybody would deny that human intelligence is in some ways further developed
and virtually any other intelligence on the planet maybe, more close to or near the top
or whatever way you want to put it.
But is it different?
Is it fundamentally different in some way, in this discontinuous way?
Or are we just looking at a kind of a quantum leap, a gap?
I mean I'm personally philosophically against the idea of discontinuity because that immediate
magic sauce of some sort or another special sauce that I mean assuming we all believe
that mentality of all sorts is basically physically embodied in this thing called the brain and
the rest of the nervous system then if you think human intelligence is different than
other animals' intelligence then it has to be because we have some special sauce which
I don't think is the case.
So I'm a kind of a no-miracles kind of person in that sense.
So it can't be totally discontinuous and yet you're absolutely right that you can't fool
yourself into believing that it's perfectly continuous either in some just tiny incremental
way.
So it's an interesting question.
I mean where are the differences?
And I think there are differences not only between say elephants and humans or chimps
and humans or dolphins and humans whatever you want to consider the next best thing to
us or something like that in some scale but there are differences all the way through
the animal kingdom where there are these jumps that may look discontinuous but are not.
They're just using the same stuff for different purposes, for new purposes perhaps.
Did you ever have, oh I thought you were.
We do questions after.
Oh okay.
I guess.
Is that right?
No, no, no, no.
No, no.
No, no, no.
Right.
Okay.
Is that human intelligence evolves but that animal intelligence doesn't evolve.
Am I any question correct?
I think it is.
Humans are more intelligent today than they were 5,000 years ago but the elephant is the
same.
Well that's hard to say.
You don't have that.
You have that question then 5,000 years ago but there's something that happened in the
human design that led to so many different faculties, so many different faculties arose
with hominids.
Now you could say that that's part just a circumfusion.
You have an animal that's upright, capable of you in a way that you know they're forelimbs
in a way that no other animal can and all of a sudden because of that they were you know
they were capable of new behaviors and one of them is simply eating differently.
Maybe that alone could account for the change in the size of the brain and yet the question
I ask myself just studying anatomy is an area that I'm interested in.
I've been interested in it for a long time.
What is, why is it that it seems that just being upright is associated with being more
conscious?
To me there's some, so almost like a qualitative connection.
I mean you know Jane Goodall used to say that she felt that chimpanzees were capable of awe.
Certain pretty unusual emotions she said she believed that.
I'm not sure that's.
But she believed that a chimpanzee seen a new beautiful setting that they could look and
experience some kind of emotion.
It seems to me that in primates something happened where going, the mere fact of being upright
seems to decouple thinking from motor function.
Not in the sense that Stuart and I were, Stuart was mentioning how function is the basis of
so much complexity in cognition.
I'd agree.
That motor function, separate function functionally but it says if in the human motor system cognition
begins to find a separate way of operating separately from motor action so that as far
as I know, and I could be, I'm not an expert in animal cognition, but as far as I know animals
almost, I could stand corrected just from what you said to Anna, but so many animals
when you see them thinking, they're thinking is linked with movement.
So a dog that sees prey.
It may stop and look at the prey and lose interest and walk away, but even when it's
stopped, it's either loses interest or it's calculating how to get the prey.
It never seems to move independently of the action.
It's like it's one operating system, but a human being could do something in my view
that's unique, whereas a human being can sit and look at a piece of food and deliberate
whether they want the food and say, I'm not even sure.
You're going to say a bird can do it.
Griffin passed the marshmallow test.
Well, I want to hear.
I'm going to test.
You know, wait 15 minutes.
We can give him, he has a nut in front of him.
We show him if you wait for the nut, wait, you'll get a skittle, which he loves much
more, and I'll sit there for 15 minutes and he does the same behavior patterns as the
kids do.
He pushes the nut away.
He turns around and he starts preening so he doesn't have to look at it.
He tries to fall asleep.
I mean, he starts talking to himself and muttering things to himself and things.
It's...
You don't walk easily.
The same type of thing.
You just train.
I actually...
No, but this was not trained.
Our dog, I have it on video.
Our dog does it.
We have him share a dog.
And we did a...
I put a treat down there and I said, just stay in the sense of training.
Like the videos you showed me, I mean, we didn't do a whole system.
I'm at Big Newfoundland and he's looking at it and he looks at me and he looks at the
thing.
He looks away.
It's like, he looks...
Finally, he just...
He's like real...
He's like every...
He finally leaves and then he comes back and he...
You know, similar kinds of things.
We have these similarities in patterns.
I think animals, you know, I think the constraint we have...
I do think they're thinking.
I mean, we've had situations where...
Okay, so this is my...
Like study.
So he was trained to use the word none for the absence of similarity.
So you could take any two things out of your pocket and say, what's the same, what's different?
He'd say, color, shape, matte, or none.
If nothing, we're same or different.
So we're now doing a number of comprehension study.
He's already at the point where you can put a tray out with red and blue balls and blocks.
So you've got four sets of things mixed in...
You know, how many blue blocks and I'll tell you.
So now we got to do comprehension.
So there's three, four, and six things on the tray.
And we've already had like a dozen trials where you say, you know, what...
Then he says blue because there are six blue blocks on the tray.
So now I come in with the three...
You know, this set of things and I say, Alex, what color three?
And he looks at me and he goes five.
There's no five things on the tray.
Now usually when he doesn't want to work, he takes his beak and wax everything off on
the floor or turns around and starts...
But he's giving me a number...
Or he gives me all the wrong colors.
So if the color's on the tray of red, blue, and green, he says purple, orange, and yellow
and stuff.
So...
But now he's giving me this number.
So...
You know, what color three?
Five.
Finally I go, okay, smarty.
What color five?
And he looks at me and he goes, none.
So not only did he, you know, use none as a zero-like concept, which we in the West didn't
do till the 1600s, but he figured out how to manipulate me into...
And asking the question he wanted to answer.
But he's using language, that's interesting.
In that case, he seems like he's using language in a meaningful way.
I have to say, just as quick as I...
Are you training this bird to be a synestee?
I'm just...
I can't...
Can you train synestee?
Call those.
No, I'm just...
I just wanted to follow up with something because I mean, you also told me these some anecdotes.
I mean, a lot of what happens to us is we see something happen once.
Yeah.
You know, experiment.
But you told me a series of things, similar to this, where you were with Alex when he
chewed up your paper and you yelled at him and then...
Can you talk to...
Because this says a lot.
It's similar to what you just talked about.
He had actually had gone out of the room and he had dropped A. I think this is the
sorry one, okay.
So he had managed to climb off his perch and he smashed a coffee cup.
And I come back into the room and there is this bird in the midst of shattered crockery.
And like...
I have to say, I was really careful not to anthropomorphize and to try to be a scientist,
but I come in and it's this instinct of going, you know, the danger thing.
If you came into the room and you saw your child on the floor with shattered crockery,
you're saying, how could you do that?
And then all of a sudden you realize, you know, this is not useful.
So I realized he's...
And not just sometimes you bird, he's scared because this thing has been made a huge noise
and there's all this stuff around here.
And he's looking at me and I pick him and I say, I'm sorry, I'm so sorry, I'm so sorry.
You know, and then he learned to use this.
There was no contrition necessarily.
But he figured out that if he was being yelled at for something and he said, I'm sorry in
this little pathetic voice, it completely, you know, took down our anger levels.
So it was again a way of learning how to manipulate us using speech.
He may not know what it means, but how many of you...
And others who say I'm sorry all the time and there's no contrition.
Well actually I wanted to kind of attach to that a little bit, which was the study I did
on dogs and whether they have...
Or they do have a guilty look, but whether it indicates that they experience guilt.
But to me it highlights an interesting kind of tension that is coming up here, which is
do they have some emotional experience, which indicates that they have a complexity of mind
that we do and are maybe ruminating on what's been about to happen or did happen.
Or are they just an instinctive actor or is there some manipulation going on?
And so in this study that I did, I just looked at whether this guilty look, the dog show,
which is you might have a dog right if we had a head down and the tail and maybe moving
away from you, actually indicates that they're experiencing something like guilt or whether
it rises from some prompt.
And so I asked...
I went to owners homes, which is a really nice thing about dealing with dogs instead of elephants.
And I asked the owners, they solved in this study and they put a treat in front of their
dog, told their dog not to eat it, left the root.
And we just sort of saw what happened next.
If they ate the treat, I called the owners back in the room and said they ate it and they
were asked to scold their dogs.
If they didn't eat the treat, I called the owners back in the room and I said they were
obedient and they just greet their dogs happily like you do when you come back from the other
room.
But of course it's as I called...
I misled the owners in half the trials.
So sometimes when the dog was obedient, I said actually they ate the treat and so they'd
be scolded.
It was very deceptive.
And sometimes when the dog was disobedient, sometimes when the dog was disobedient, they
got away with it.
I said they didn't eat the treat and so they were greeted.
And then I just taped how much...
What the dog was...
Of these conditions.
And what was clear, clear, clear is that they showed guilty look, a little bit of guilty
look all the time, but they showed most guilty look not when they were actually guilty of
having disobeyed their owner and eating the treat.
It was when the owner scolded them.
You could say a lot of things about that.
You could say dogs don't feel guilt.
I don't think I can say that based on that.
But certainly when we think based on that look that we're getting some access into their
minds, that seems to be a disconnect.
On the other hand, what is that reaction?
It's probably a reaction to the unlearn behavior, kind of like I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry
to avoid punishment by the owner.
So is that kind of more intelligent?
Is it more clever?
Is it certainly...
Is it less like us?
I don't know.
It's manipulative as well.
You have the tail head.
Okay, I'll tell the fish story.
This is like the big fish story.
So I was as graduate student.
I was doing my PhD and I was working with this young dolphin who I was asked to teach
her to station, which means the dolphin stays in front of you as long as you have a bucket
on the side of a pool.
It's been caught from in the wild, which I am saying this publicly.
We shouldn't be taking dolphins and whales from the wild.
This was a long time ago when people still did it.
She was a young dolphin and I had to teach her to station.
So I handed these big mackerels to mackerel fish, which are like this big, the dolphin's
head is this big.
And I cut the fish up into three sections, heads, middles and tails.
It would be easier for her to eat and it would give me more fish to work with.
And she ate the heads, she ate the middle sections, she spit out every tail I gave her.
So I looked at it.
Maybe it's the fins that are, you know, she doesn't like.
So I cut the fins off.
I fed her the fish and she ate everything.
So I make the joke who trained who here.
You know, she's now trained me to prepare her fish.
Anyway, she had been a smart dolphin and she had learned to station within a day or
so.
And I'm feeding her and everything's fine.
But in the course of me training her to station, if she didn't stay with me, I would use a
correction procedure who will 10 to 15 feet.
And I just stand there and stare at her and she'd watch me.
That was my way of letting her know she did the wrong thing.
It was breaking social contact and she couldn't get.
I come back.
It seemed to work and she learned to stay if she didn't want me to back up.
Everything's going fine.
It's two or three or four days down the line.
And by this time now, I throw her.
She's stationing perfectly.
One day I threw her an untakened steak.
She looks up at me.
She spits the fish out and she makes a beeline for the other side of the pool and takes a
horizontal position and just stands there.
Right?
And I'm thinking, can this possibly be very much like what you talked about with Alex?
And I'm thinking, is she really using this timeout back on me?
Was it a timeout?
I forgot to tell you that.
So, now this is an anecdote and you're not going to write this one up in a paper.
And I was working on my doctoral thesis at the time.
And I thought, wait a minute, maybe I can make this into an experiment.
So what I did was I was really careful over the next couple of sessions to cut all the
fish right.
And she stayed with me the whole time.
But then a couple days later on purpose, I gave her another uncut tale to see.
And don't you know it?
Bum across the side of the pool.
She does the timeout again.
And she did this on three other occasions over the course of the next weeks.
I love this story because first of all, she went to Dolphin gave me.
She was a complete collaborator on this.
And it just goes to show you to me what's the essence of communication and how it develops.
As a graduate student, that was my field, bioacoustics and communication is when children
learn, when we're interacting at home or animals that we're working with in labs or
the field, there's this mutual synthesis of behavior, synchrony of behavior.
We don't know what the other is, what's in the head of another.
You open any communication textbook.
The meaning is not in the message.
It's in our interpretation.
And what true communication in my mind is about is how we synchronize our behavior patterns,
how it functions.
I'll give you one more example.
Gregory Bates, and many of you have heard of Gregory Bates in a communication theorist,
he talked about the fact that his son and his wife and he, I think it was Margaret Mead,
he was married to at the time, traveled to South America.
His child didn't know any Spanish and they were unpacking their luggage and his child
went out onto the street and he and his wife look out on the street, they're amazed to
see their kid playing kickball or football in the street.
And every so often they hear him yelling, aki aki and the ball gets thrown to the child.
And you know, he's using it and the kid comes back up into the hotel room and Bates and
says, learn that so fast.
How did you learn what a kimen?
He goes, I don't know what it meant, I just saw how it worked.
When anybody yelled aki, they got the ball.
And I think that's very much what Cersei did.
She learned the function and I think that is really how we start to communicate.
And I think, Alex, when you probably talk to people about their dogs and ask how many
of you think they're communicating, they say, yeah, we communicate with our pets because
we do.
They're learning our patterns, we're learning their patterns, it may not mean the same
thing, but there's some organization and pattern behavior that develops.
So.
I just wanted to go back if it's okay for a moment to the question that Ed asked of
you and your idea that you've been somehow or another have developed a different kind
or a more advanced kind of intelligence and whether or not we would think that was true
of humans 5,000 years ago, whether they were smarter.
And I'd like to suggest that actually.
If Alex is the parent, if Alex has children or the children smarter than other parents.
Well, he didn't have children.
And what happened was he, when we had another little bird in the lab, he was so aggressive
that he had this little bird and interrupt all of his sessions.
You know, Griffin learned some things from Alex, but Alex did not want to teach him.
It was only towards the end of his life that we figured out how to see that he would get
a lot more attention if he helped teach Griffin, but that was the end of his life.
But, you know, I mean, I'm sorry, but it's an interesting question.
And the funny thing is that we now have a little female, so there's no aggression.
And that was one of the reasons we got a female to see if Griffin's going to teach her.
But to add to your question, I think, if we look across other animal societies like elephants,
dolphins, dogs, I'm sure, as well, many animals, dolphins, we see that there is what we think
is growing evidence for cultural transmission.
And yeah, but learning through observation.
What do you do?
I'm actually sort of, in spite of cultural transmission, I mean, I think, Ted, I think
if you were here 5,000 years ago, you would have the same low opinion of humans that you
have of elephants.
Because for 5,000 years, they fricking did nothing, frankly.
I mean, the Bronze Age went on for 2,000 years.
50 generations were born, grew up, and died, and precisely the same technology.
I'm just not like it is today.
Today is different.
I agree.
Since the enlightenment, something has changed, but that can't clearly be evolution because
it's not enough time.
I mean, now, if you go away for a holiday for two weeks, you come back and you're operating
systems out of date.
I don't know, everything is wrong.
You're not like part of it anymore, you know.
You're hopelessly behind.
But I mean, there were long, long stretches of time while we were upright and had this
very same brain we had now when kind enough and much happened when we didn't really develop
anything of any particular value and just kept beating the crap out of each other in
little trouble, we still do, in fact.
So...
But it is an interesting issue is why us, why us with technology, what stopped...
That's a discontinuity, I agree.
But it's not an...
One or a physical one or maybe even one of cognition.
I mean, it's a discontinuity of, I don't know, it's a certain kind of thinking that may have
been quite accidental.
It's not as though science had a bunch of times and then petered out.
The Greeks had science, but then it kind of stopped after all the Arabs had a very flourishing
science in it that kind of didn't continue in a way.
So so far, we have one that continues and I think that's in many ways what we refer to
when we...
I mean, not just science, physics and all that, but a scientific frame of mind is what
we refer to as a kind of a modern mind and to me that is different and that's what gives
us I think the impression that we're different than so many other animals or cone habitants.
I think about the fossil record for certain other species.
I'm only going to talk about dolphins.
It's the only one I really feel comfortable talking about that I know anything about.
But you know, there's evidence that over time their brains got larger and the bodies remained
somewhat smaller.
So brain size has increased.
There's always the...
Dolphins, cetaceans.
Dolphins and whales.
There's always the constraint of with mammals.
They have to be able to pass through a pelvic bone.
But the brains are large and complex and they've increased in size over time.
So that's interesting.
Again, those brains, you know, the overall bodies of these guys are pretty big and they're
in an aquatic environment.
So perhaps they're less constrained that way.
And then also you have arguments that depending on the...
That animals have.
For example, elephants and dolphins have been...
And humans are considered by many of the show the highest levels of...
There's some papers that have come out recently.
And some of that's really been attributed to...
In these groups and things like that.
So there are all sorts of different ways of thinking about intelligence and how we measure
it.
And I'm sorry, I'd go ahead.
I am on the fact that I don't...
Maybe I just disagree with everyone else here that there is just like a linear progression
that man is at...
Humans are at the Acme.
I just...
I actually don't believe that.
I mean, I don't...
How do you feel?
You feel there is a...
As opposed, I don't necessarily mean there have to be multiple intelligences.
I don't...
I'm not sure that I love the word intelligence to describe what any animal is doing, including
the human animal.
But I guess I'm more ethologically driven.
I'm interested in how the animal is fitting into its environment.
And if the question is maybe it's about success, you know?
I mean, if humans are going to survive, or I don't know if we're going to survive for
another 150 years, but there might be plenty of animals who do.
So are they then the Acme of biological, you know, of...
of neural...
Nearly founded organisms?
To me, I'm still...
I feel like it's a very...
Sometimes you squirrels, you know, get through the bird feeder that you've tried every single
conceivable way of, you know.
And if we're talking about your downing, your type of thing, then we see other animals doing.
So there are things which we seem to do alone.
That I absolutely assent to.
But I find the kind of complexities of other animals' behavior to be as radical.
And the fact that we can't go into their minds and say what they're doing in those moments
when they seem to be doing nothing doesn't mean to me that they're doing nothing.
It seems to me that we don't know what they're doing, which is a fault of our mind, not theirs.
I'm just trying to understand.
I thought a moment ago, you didn't agree with that you felt that there was a discontinuity.
Now it sounds like...
I'm not clear.
I think it's an odd way to pose the whole structure.
There either has to be a continuum or not, because we're at the top of it, right?
That there's some progression of sophistication of cognition.
And then the question you seem to be asking is how do we get very top of that?
What is it through some radical thing that happened?
Or is it sort of through small changes?
And I'm saying I don't think we're up at the top at all.
I think it's sort of messier than that.
That's the wrong...
I mean, that's also...
We now know that's the completely wrong way to think of evolution.
I mean, evolution is not a pyramid.
It's a bush.
It's a tree.
It's a plurality.
Every creature that currently exists is at the top of the evolutionary branch that it's
sifting.
Yeah.
But it's only...
I think you're absolutely right.
It's only when it comes to mentality or cognition that we insist on this more linear idea that
continuity no longer means a tree, which is also...
I mean, we believe in evolutionary continuity, but it no longer means a plurality of continuities.
It means a single one, a single line.
Here's the dumbest thing and we're the smartest thing.
And everybody has some place along the line, which I think is completely wrong.
Why not?
That's not the point of all of the stuff that we do.
I mean, what did you say?
90 million years for the dolphin, humans?
95...
Okay.
280 million for the parrots versus our last common ancestor with a dinosaur is 280 million
years ago.
I mean, yet, I've got this bird that's doing the same thing a five-year-old can do.
Okay?
I mean, and again, we don't know some of the things that they're...
So why do you have to get it to do what a five-year-old can do and it didn't develop
itself?
The ability to do what a five-year-old can do?
Because I gave it a symbolic representation, which is what you give your five-year-old
to.
I mean, you don't put the five-year-old in a cage and say, here's some food and treats
and I'll come back in five years and see what you've done.
I mean, we give it this symbolic representation.
Our five-year-old representation and parrots didn't.
Well, we don't...
You know, the interesting thing is with all of these animals is that we are just beginning
to understand their communication systems and that's a whole mother, totally another
game plan here, is that...
I mean, we've been...
You know, for bird song, we've been sending bird songs since the 60s and we're just now
because we got so much better equipment.
Okay, being able to start to...
Just really start to tease apart what they're doing when they're sitting out there, you
know, it sounds like just pretty song to us, but we're beginning to learn that there's
so much more complexity.
Each song has a different...
I don't want to say exactly meaning because then you think of it as meaning like our language,
but each song has a different effect on the recipient and the recipient responds in a
different way depending on which song it's heard.
I mean, they're...
I used to call it Marsha Ren Poker, okay, because the bird would...
Each bird has like 50 songs and they have them in different orders and the birds know
not only their 50 songs orders, but their neighbor's 50 songs orders and they'll match
them and raise them one, okay?
So you know, you sing your 47 and I'll go, I'm going to sing your 48, but that's my 32,
but I know it's your 48, so I'm going to match you and raise you one to tell you that I want,
you know, your elbow is getting too close into my territory here.
I mean, these are things we're just beginning to learn, so I'm never going to argue that
their communication systems are as rich and as varied as ours.
At this point, it's not clear that they can sit there and tell you what they did yesterday,
okay?
Right, depends on us too, but the issue is that it is more complicated than we thought,
and I don't think...the one thing I'm sure of is that I couldn't have mapped whatever
English I did onto his abilities if there wasn't some basic cognitive architecture there.
I mean, if he didn't have some kind of innate, quote-unquote, sense of same and different,
I couldn't have mapped English terms of same and different onto it.
And that's a really critical point.
I sort of say, you know, again, we're pretty blind and deaf to what they can do.
We can't decode.
We don't have that magic decoder thing with these guys.
Yeah.
Right.
I mean, we have the sense system compared to a dog, there's like, there's such primitive
idiots.
I mean...
So, I mean, the problem is not the one of them.
It's sort of something that we would all claim that we're against, but which we're all participating
in, and we're not careful, which is a kind of an anthropocentrism, right?
A anthropocentrism doesn't give other creatures human-like qualities, it's just the opposite.
It uses humans as the only way to measure anything.
Right.
Instead of looking at a plurality of cognitive abilities, a plurality of cognitions, a plurality
of consciousness, all the things brain tissue can do in whatever vehicle that happens to
be running in.
That seems to me to be a much more interesting kind of pursuit than worrying about how to
classify this stuff on a scale in which humans sort of denote the top level, some bug, the
bug, something like that.
If this is kidding, we don't have an octopus.
Let me kind of say something to challenge this idea.
Because the reason why, apart from the question of what's actually true about what happens
in human evolution, I've had the experience very often when I, let's say, give a talk
on anatomy.
When someone speaks up in a group and says, you know, we're really not, I've had people
say this to me in a group, in a seminar.
We're really not like monkeys.
We really have no connection to monkeys.
It turns out that they have very religious creationist kind of view.
People often side with Darwin, say, and very sort of come up to me later on and say, wow,
we don't believe in that.
We're not the animals.
We're part of the animal kingdom.
But I've also had the experience on the flip side that if I say to a group of people, you
don't really think that the law of natural selection explains what's happened with the
emergence of complex life forms, particularly the human life form, which by the way, I
have no trouble at all unique for vaccines.
And I think one way that we don't understand birds, I don't think we understand all the
human faculties either.
And when I say that flip side of it, people will often say, you're right, I don't believe
it.
And I've found that to be the same group, we'll go both ways.
In other words, our lived beliefs often don't reflect our intellectual beliefs.
Our intellectual belief in natural selection is often not people's lived belief.
And I want to know why, because the fact is that we all, why is it that, yes, I agree,
birds can do things we didn't dream of 100 years ago, but why is it that a six-year-old
can often outstrip what any bird can do?
Why?
What happened in humans to make them so smart?
Well, I'm not, when I say this, I don't, well, and birds can do things that six-year-olds
cannot do.
I don't mean to, I don't mean to say that humans are better in every respect than animals.
That's not my point of view.
I mean, Darwin remarked that the instincts of bees were as wonderful as human intelligence
in that comment.
He was, Darwin loved the animal kingdom.
He sort of almost worshiped it.
I agree with that.
I think cats, we have three cats, and I think they're unbelievable.
And they're far more sensitive in my home in many ways.
So I'm not saying humans are just somehow better in every respect, but with respect
to the question of decoupled cognizance, something has happened in humans that hasn't
happened with any other species.
And my question is why?
Does not explain it?
I think it only explains a part of it.
It can't explain all of it.
And one of the reasons why natural selection can't explain all of it is because natural
selection as a proposition already presupposes life and a proposition that includes something
like, in this case, life as part of the proposition can't explain something presupposed in the
process.
Natural selection sounds like an abstract principle, but it isn't.
It's a principle that says, hey, if they're a mating pair of birds that create four birds
every year, and the population of birds in a given area, assuming they're no incoming
and outgoing birds, remains the same, that means every year two out of four of the birds
are dying.
It's just a simple randomness principle that the ones that are let it for their environment
die and the ones that are slightly more, it's a randomness principle, but it presupposes
life and life is already moving toward a higher organization.
The question is why.
That's completely wrong.
Well, so I'm sorry.
So one of the things that evolution and natural selection...
Before you answer, I would like to hear from everyone on this question, not just told them
wrong, okay?
Okay.
So I would just say that I think one of the common errors about evolution and natural
selection is that it's an optimization procedure, that it's optimizing everything that the best
that there is and will continue to improve, that it's an improvement program, and that's
just simply not the case.
That's why 99.9% of the species that have ever existed on the planet are currently extinct.
So it's not very good at optimizing at all.
There's an old joke about this, which is a science joke, so it's not going to be funny.
Don't plan on laughing or anything, but two scientists are out camping one night in the
woods, you know, and the flated night and all of a sudden a bear begins to sort of attack
the tent and rattle the tent.
Well, they both jump up.
One of them starts putting his sneakers on, and the other one says, what are you telling
your sneakers over?
You can't outrun a bear.
He says, I just have to outrun you.
So you know, right?
So evolution is only optimized to outrun each other, so the other guy is the meal, not
the eater of the person.
So yeah, this is a better joke than I thought.
I didn't make it up.
So I think you will, I just think you have to be careful not to get in there.
So I in some ways agree with you.
I didn't say evolution is optimizing anything.
No, in fact, you might even have a better species than humans that doesn't get selected
next year, I mean, theoretically, because natural selection doesn't allow natural selection
as a principle isn't operating.
I'm saying it doesn't explain the whole question of how life is.
I agree with you because it's not an optimization thing.
It's nothing to do with optimization.
I mean, the fact that we're able to have this round table and smart enough to talk and all
the rest of this kind of stuff could just be some, probably likely is for sure some huge
accident.
It's a good one so far.
I mean, we don't really know how well it's going to work.
I mean, surely it will be extinct one day.
Everything else is why wouldn't we be?
So I'm just suggesting in some ways I'm actually supporting what you're saying.
I wouldn't use evolution to explain a scale of intelligence.
I wouldn't use it actually to explain a scale of anything.
So in that sense, I agree with you.
I just, so I think it's a strong man.
It's all arrow direction.
Evolution or there is.
So what's the purpose of that arrow direction?
Oh, there is no arrow of direction.
So I'm saying it's a sort of a strong man argument.
That's all I'm, my only point is not.
I don't believe evolution has an arrow either, but I believe life itself pushes toward organization.
And I know that's controversial, but the fact is that when you allow people to say, well,
you know, it does kind of appeal, this isn't species don't disappear.
There have been other, there seems to have been a species, an upright hominid that had
a larger brain than us that didn't make it.
So it's not as if something animal is meant to appear.
I'm not even suggesting that.
It does everything we've talked about is based on vertebrates.
I mean, most of our discussion.
And why is it that vertebrates go to, no, I know, cephalopods are amazing, but cephalopods
are not going to go past the design template that's allowed them.
I think some cephalopods appear to be incredibly smart in ways that we, I don't think we should
eat an octopus.
I think they seem to be to be too smart.
And I don't like to eat animals that are, that's smart.
But they have a design that's doesn't, isn't going to go past what their design allows.
In the same way, I think that a bird design can't go past what a bird design allows.
But do you say that you don't know what the design is going to go?
Yeah.
Well, they've been, because it's not, as far as I can tell, I mean, I'm the expert on an
octopus.
But as far as I know, design can't, it can't morph, it can't somehow get bones.
We haven't seen an octopus appear.
Didn't we come out of the water, basically?
Well, no, what do we look like in the water?
No, but an octopus has gone in a particular line of evolution.
It can't go backwards in people's bones.
I'm just saying.
No, but I don't, I disagree.
I don't think that's the case.
I mean, it certainly, it's been for quite a period of time, but there's nothing that
foundationally biologically is against it evolving into something slightly different.
I think that are there, that, you know, there's a pile of scents that sits around and will
only get expressed under certain conditions.
I mean, it's the Darwin's Finches things, where you start switching things around and
then they'll change and back and forth.
Then it got the pie that actually walk sometimes on two of their, you know, legs, arms, and
you could see where bipedal and you could see under certain circumstances that could
be selected for, there might be advantages and things.
I mean, I think we have to be really careful about saying where animals can, how they
can and cannot change and the college epigenetic thing.
What it looks like in the case of human cognition or human mental abilities is, there's something
that's going faster than you could explain by evolution.
Something has developed that you can't simply use an evolution for because there's been
enough time in a way.
And I mean, I agree with you.
My only concern is I feel like it's a strong man argument.
I'm not quite saying that.
I'm saying that a natural selection alone doesn't explain it.
Yeah, I also, but so I was a little concerned.
So what do you mean by life tries to get better or so?
What did you say?
Exactly.
About living matter, does something?
It verdence.
It sounds like it had a point.
Well, you know, it sounds nice when you're using a, when we talk the language of science,
it sounds, you know, we have a sort of, seem to have a preference for sort of arguments
about randomness or, and we tend to get cynical and say, well, human beings at 30, everything
deteriorates, you know, we're not really meant to be here.
We're sort of meant to die off and we keep our elders alive because it seems more civilized.
And so the cynical language, I don't think that's really what's going on with humans.
I think with vertebrates are what they are.
And intelligence has developed because they express a level of complexity that you don't
find in other animals.
I mean, an animal with an external skeleton can't, again, I'm no expert on insects, but
an animal with an exoskeleton sort of is a dead end in terms of design.
But the vertebrate design was so, with the internal skeleton, the internal skeleton,
the musculature on the outside going on to land, which a flexible design that it allowed
pull, you know, like a book of marvels.
It allowed all these different animals to emerge, which we're looking at and we're
one of them.
And that is based on the complex multi-celled design that we have.
How does life push in that direction?
Why does it push in that direction?
It's got organization.
Life, we haven't understood what makes life what it is.
And one of the properties seems to me is that it is self-organizing and it puts different
ways of organizing itself.
And I know scientists don't like that, but...
I can't really understand as a useful expert.
Well, I just can't understand it as a useful explanation.
It looks that way.
Yeah, but you don't defy the second law of thermodynamics.
I don't care who you are.
I don't care how great you think we are.
The second law of thermodynamics, I'm sorry.
What's remarkable about us is that we figured out there's a second law of thermodynamics.
That I will admit to you, that's one of the most remarkable...
A mentation I can ever imagine, but you don't get away with it.
That's like biblical, second law of thermodynamics.
You don't mess with that.
I just don't think there's any indication that we ever get away with it.
If life is...
If there's only entropy, if things are only...
How is it that we're all sitting here and can maintain our organized life forms in such
a high level even...
The other word, using up the planet to do it.
That's how we do it.
We use up the planet.
Which is fine.
I'm not even against that.
You know, I don't necessarily...
But within reason, I suppose.
But in point, that's how we do it.
The course of our life and species itself could fall apart.
I mean, we're just a snapshot.
I feel like we're very focused in our...
We're very provincial in our looking.
I mean, of course we're going to be anthropocentric.
We're anthrows.
That's...
I think the only thing we can do is be aware, but also the temporal probability.
like we see here and we see, you know, we know what's happening right then and maybe
what happened yesterday.
I mean, actually that is very narrow and what is actually happening in the species or what's
actually the case with our species I think is very hard to say.
I don't want to say it.
You know, I think we are probably.
I'm more of a believer in physics than biology there.
We're falling apart.
When I say this organization, I see some people nodding and when I say this, this organization
is so people.
Interesting sort of area of psychology, which I don't know that much about, but it really
is again, a dependent thing, which means the way you phrase a particular question affects
the kind of answer you get.
And I'm wondering if we're dancing around that a little bit too.
So that there's certain ways you say, well, you know, would you, it's a study about it
says, you know, there's a certain amount of for doing something.
You probably know this better than I and it's like you can say it's that 50% of the people
will get this disease or you could say so many people out of a certain number will get this
disease and if you phrase it one way, it's much more positive than the other.
You probably can.
There's something about being liars, damn liars, mathematicians.
But this whole, it's an entire subset of psychology that basically, what do you think in Madison
Avenue certainly takes advantage of it.
So that there are, there are ways of phrasing certain types of questions and you have to
be very careful about that too.
Yes.
I mean, I think the danger, I think what Alex Andrews saying is that we are trapped if
we're not very careful in a fairly parochial view of things.
It's very local and it's very hard.
I mean, this is why pseudoscience is so, it gets purchased so easily because it's very
hard not to look.
I mean, there's a great story by Wittgenstein, apparently at some point was walking with
a friend and said, it's always a man, people so long to figure out that the earth is rotating
and the sun is standing still.
And his friend said, well, but Ludwig, it looks that way, doesn't it?
And we can see because what would it look like if the earth were rotating and the sun
was standing still?
It looks like what it is, you know?
But it does just look that way.
And indeed, it's still very hard to figure out why it is the earth is spinning in a thousand
miles an hour and the birds and the clouds aren't being left behind.
I mean, really, most people could not tell you how that is.
I'm not so sure I could in a way that you would believe me.
So but it's very easy to have these.
I mean, we still all live in a pre-kapurnican world.
We're real smart folks sitting in this room and we say, what time is the sun setting?
Well, the sun's not setting and it's not, you know, but that's the way it goes, you
know?
We live in a Newtonian world and that's not true either, really, but it serves our purposes.
But you're going to have these parochial views and believe there's a lot of truth in them.
And I think that's a potential danger.
You have to be covered.
You do have to try and expand it a bit as much as you possibly can, it seems to me.
We do, who are studying animals is give examples of animals doing something which seems to
us who is evidence of a kind of cognition and then maybe somebody will give a counter-example
of a person doing something like that.
And that's also a way of defining our terms.
I mean, we're trying to just get traction and to get any funding or anybody to take
you seriously when you're dealing with the non-human animals.
That's part of it.
But also, what if we all just talked about the mistakes that we see animals make or the
mistakes that humans make and had that be defining of what the species were, we would
look very different as people as opposed to looking at our high achievements and being
so impressed by our high achievements.
I'm thinking about all the mistakes I've recently made.
Would that be defining of me as a human being, as a member of the species?
Would that be any more indicative maybe of what the human is?
Human species and we talk about, well, no animal is a Picasso or a Beethoven or an Einstein,
but there's only been a Picasso.
I mean, the thing is we look at these exceptional individuals and we say, well, humans are capable
of this because one or two of these individuals have done this.
But the average person on the street, I mean, I can't comparatively carry a tune, much
less do what Beethoven did.
So again, we also have to think about it in those ways that we put ourselves on this
pinnacle and also in academia, there's even a stronger chance of this because we hang
out with all these elites and stuff.
So this is another thing that we have to think about too.
I mean, even the psych studies, we talk about now that these students being weird, you know,
up educated, you know, I mean, it's like we're all the studies we do in psychology, they're
all in, you know, college sophomores, okay, and we try to claim that this is representative
of the human race.
I mean, this is insane.
I think one of the themes I think that's emerging or it's conversation from the idea
of plurality and different ways of thinking is, you know, again, we're the ones talking
about it.
A really broad look and you look at insect societies, you look at the algebra, I keep
remembering I have dolphins just because I study them.
These are societies and they're in every way.
When you look at a dolphin society, they have not altered their environment much.
They can't relate it, but their bodies have changed morphologically.
They've radically streamlined to adapt to their environment and beautifully continue
to change, obviously, as we've seen it.
And they find ways to coordinate their behavior.
They show exquisite complexity and they're not destroying their environment.
So you know, again, this sort of gets back to you.
Big brains taking care of their own operating, helping others.
I mean, that's pretty cool in my book about what is sort of evolved and it just hasn't
evolved in our way.
We've taken another route and we're facing a lot of problems now.
Dolphins may be facing other problems we aren't aware of.
But again, I think we have...
The stream is at the Mark Moffatt who's an entomologist, a specialist.
Have you ever had him at one of these things?
You should have Mark Moffatt.
Yeah, well, I'll get him to come over here.
He's busy with his hands all the time.
But Mark points out that there are really only two species on the planet that live in
societies that number into the millions and that are willing to live in a society in which
they don't pretty much know within one or two degrees of separation, at least everybody
in the society.
They don't live with strangers.
So chimp troops and things like that, all number under 100...
The only two species that are willing to live in vast numbers with strangers all around
them.
They're sitting in a room like full of strangers here, right?
And it's just us and ants.
And only certain...
We live in these huge colonies where they just...
There's no way they know everybody, but they do it.
They're fine with it.
And us, weird, huh?
I don't know.
It makes you feel creepy.
That's...
One of the reasons why I originally brought this subject up with Diana.
And then you, Stuart, and I think...
I think you were also there when we first discussed this was...
I was looking at it the other way around.
We focused on what animals can do and animals or intelligence and their ability to learn
and so on.
I was also interested the other way because with my background in psychoanalysis, so my
focus has always been the mind.
It has not been on, in what ways, a lot of things that we attribute motivation to are
really biologically determined just as they are in animals.
And so a lot of things we do say similar to what you said.
A newborn turns towards the mother's breast and sucks on the breast.
And in psychoanalysis, there is an idea that from Freud that this is the beginning of
psychosexual development and there's pleasure attached to it and so on.
And so animals do it too.
So my question is, and I wonder if you can say something a little bit more about that.
This excessive focus on the mind in understanding people's behavior is incomplete.
And how would understanding animals' behavior help us understand more human behavior?
Can I raise my hand on that one?
So this is something I find really interesting particularly when we get in the area of social
sexual behavior in humans and other animals.
Obviously, we're a lot more tolerant in our society now than we were before.
You look at other animals like binobos, which are very sophisticated primates and dolphins,
and you look at the development of what we call socio-sexual behavior.
So I'll give you the shortest possible story here.
So we had studied two mothers on their calves in a facility.
What you see is that what looks to be the adult sexual behavior pattern and much of
social behavior develops with mothers and infants.
They are stimulating their babies, they're nursing their babies, they're nursing their
babies, they're not the ventrum solicitors of babies.
There may be some where we don't know where the baby starts nursing, one creases, the
mother tends to direct it.
Then the mother is also stimulating the big genital area with her big genital area.
Then you see these chases that ensue, the baby sprints off from the mother, the mother's
chasing the baby.
As I was watching this, I was looking and I'm saying I'm seeing the courtship behavior
pattern in the adult pattern.
I found it fascinating because again, when you think about the roots of sociality and
sexuality, it may come from these very early interactions.
Then we saw these two young children had shown these interactions with their mothers.
Now in their first months, that's how they start interacting.
That's what they know, solicitors.
You see this in the wild, it's not just in a captive situation.
We obviously want to keep looking.
But I think there's a great deal that can be learned about the nature of what, again,
the socio-sexual behavior.
You look at male dolphins and people who don't know about dolphins say, oh, they're gay
or they're homosexual.
They're not.
They're interacting socially.
That is their behavior.
And female distress and start soliciting, it becomes reproductive behavior.
I think it broadens our view of these big-brained animals.
I think in our own species, take away the biblical underpinnings of what we should be
doing and what we shouldn't.
I think that may be much more natural state.
We see with bonobo societies a great deal of behavior with penguins.
We see much more socio-sexual behavior in the animal world.
And humans are part of the animal world.
So when I open her.
A lot of things that we assume we are deciding to act in a certain way or do certain things
are in fact biologically detailed.
It's not like residing.
What's a different meaning?
No, no.
It's a different panel.
You're on the wrong panel.
No, but what I'm trying to say is that there's certain that we assume we are an agenting,
that we really are simply repeating what...
One of many.
Yeah, I'm guessing about 98% of the things we do are not.
But that's...
Yes.
Franz de Valds going to be speaking next week at the American Museum and doing a great
talk on empathy.
But I'd also say there's another view as to how this kind of thing can tell us about human
behavior, which is actually I think Alexandra's point of view, which is we can learn about
our own behavior by the things we project onto a dog.
So when it comes to domestic animals, of course, we're in a selection seat with domestic animals.
So we select for things that appeal to us...
...of lee or food wise maybe, our taste buds.
But in the case of dogs that we don't eat, we're clearly selecting for traits that we
find appealing.
So this must tell us something about us.
And I know you're work enough to know that we make all sorts of mistakes about what they
do because we've rejected on them, right?
Right.
Many of our projections could probably...
I mean, could be...
But most of them really are reflections on ourself, it seems to me.
And as to that question of kind of what looking at animal behavior could tell us about human
behavior, I think because we don't have an actual human mind, we do that.
We just attribute.
And as scientists, we say, okay, don't attribute and so just look at behavior.
But so we're kind of...
We're given...
There's too much richness in the human.
We have, we think, access to each other's minds, or at least a way we feel like it's
going to be roughly analogous to my mind, right?
And so we don't even really look at behavior so much.
I mean, those who look at behavior like an ethologist, a human behavior, I think...
One of those same types of patterns that Diane is talking about with the dolphins, right?
And we recapitulate the kind of behavior, action patterns we have in our early life later
on.
And again, the ones that work to get the mate or get the friendship or get the job, we keep
those ones and we do away with the other ones.
But it's the same type of thing.
It's just that we talk about it at a higher level, right?
And all of those cognitive...
The words we talk...
I mean, this is what is so interesting about, you know, as...
Narrative psychologists, all of us who are looking at non-human minds, are words are human
words for human development.
When do we get a theory of mind?
When do we have self-awareness?
When do we develop empathy or secondary emotions and so forth?
But with all of those, we could say, well, do we really have it?
You know, theory of mind is one of those great ones where the theory of mind is thinking
the thing that all humans develop, that we're thinking at about age three or four, what
other people know or believe that's different from ourselves.
You know, before age three, children aren't really doing that, right?
They're classically egocentric and they think everybody knows what we know.
But at age four, they realize they have to wait until their mother is out of the room
to cookie, right?
And then they can deceive her because she doesn't know about that.
Well, but you could also look at a lot of human behavior and say, are we really acting
with a theory of mind?
I mean, it's what I'm doing now in my attempt to communicate, taking into account what everybody,
maybe it's imploring everybody else is bringing to the subject so that we are best communicating,
certainly not.
I'm just talking, you know, and I'm hoping that some of it hits, right?
And I have a general, I'd make a general guess as to what other people's understanding
it, and how they came to their, the words they're using.
But I certainly, I might be in the theory of mind at that level.
And so the better way would really be, I mean, I am totally an ethologist, but to look at
me and just say, how do I change my behavior to best suit situations?
And that would explain to me huge amounts of, you know, what Freud also tries to explain
using the mind.
So Ed, so I, let me give an alternative.
You could, I sort of am a human ethologist, as some of you know, I teach the Alexander
technique and my own ideas on this.
So I sort of daily observe people and I teach people performing actions.
And one thing that I observed early on as a teacher, and I, as well, is that even a simple
so-called voluntary movement in a human being is not nearly as voluntary as it appears.
And you could demonstrate this with someone, you could ask them not to perform an action,
and they'll agree with you that they will not, that they do not intend to and will not.
And then you could actually vicariously perform the movement for them, and they will perform
it against their will very often.
And you're, in my view, by the way, you're demonstrating mind.
I mean, you're demonstrating that they've, there's no way to account, except to say
that they action, you know, borrowing from William James, who described this kind of thing
years ago.
So in even the simplest action, you could describe in humans, you could, you can observe
something very mechanical and determined sort of.
And in that respect, not very different from other animals, the problem is that humans,
unlike any other animal, are capable of observing that and actually raising the process of how
they do things to a more conscious level.
And that's one thing that I study.
I study, I use the word mindfulness, but I study kind of mindfulness as a psychophysical
process, not just attentional.
And my question is, if all, if all human behavior can be reduced, or 98% of it can be reduced
to what we see in animals, why is it that we're capable of being mindful about it all
the time?
Why is it that we're capable of actually observing our, let's say, selfish motives and saying,
I don't want to behave that way.
I actually see that something I want to say is pretty much a need to speak, so I'm not
going to say that.
This quality, this capacity in humans, to me, it separates humans from all the other animals.
And it separates our behavior from any animal behavior.
Mindfulness alone.
And what worries me is that people will go to a Buddhist seminar, and they say, this
is great.
And then the next week, they'll go to a scientific seminar, and they say, no, we're
not going to be animals.
Well which is it?
I mean, listen.
I guess that.
I get that.
I get that.
I get that.
I'm saying that no other animals can show constraint or conscious thought about self or
control.
Here, I'll stand on my ground.
And no animal is capable of being mindful of practicing conscious attention.
Oh, wait.
What does that mean?
Yeah.
Let's get into a definition here.
Yeah.
Define it.
I don't know what you mean either.
Can you tell us exactly what you mean?
Well, a very simple, you know, sort of in the moment description of mindfulness is simply
doing something and being able to do it, being consciously aware while you do it.
Yes.
Well, wait a minute.
Let me talk about this.
But this is only a very fringe of what humans are capable of.
I mean, you're capable of.
I really don't understand that either.
Well, I know, but this is why I think I'm here.
And this is because I noticed that everyone's pointing at me.
But you need to articulate a little bit better.
Okay.
But give me an example.
Give me a solid example.
The other problem with when we try to explain human behavior by looking at animal behavior
is that we segregate the aspects of human behavior that are clearly, in my view, clearly
different.
And then when you say, hey, this is what I think is clearly different, people say, well,
is that even there?
Well, mindfulness is not an easy discipline to learn, but we know it can be learned.
I mean, there's just no question about this.
We know that martial artists practice it, people in meditation practice it.
So, trying to explain what that is may not be so easy.
I believe that there are a number of faculties like that similar to that that aren't not
just mindfulness, but anyway.
But what you're trying to argue is that a parrot sitting on a perd would not be mindful.
How would we?
Well, I'm not studying parrots.
Well, I mean, any.
You know, I study children.
I study children.
And I study children, you know, from a fairly young age.
So, in my view, kids cannot even remotely approach what mindfulness is clearly not till
they're in their teens and generally speaking later after their teens cannot even begin
to approach it.
So, to me, it's a cognitive skill.
And so, because I see it, see it, how difficult it is, you can't even speak of a toddler being
mindful.
It's just not possible.
And that's why I'm willing to make the transition to animals.
From what I understand of mindfulness, and it's not something I've got the idea of sort
of monitoring your own feelings and thoughts and becoming more aware of your motivations
and your overall surrounding, it's an expanded awareness of you and one aspect of that.
Okay.
So, it can also be being aware of proprioceptively.
Let's say you're sitting here and you're aware not just having kinesthetic or proprioceptive
input about your body, but monitoring it constantly so that it's something that's always in your
background awareness.
It could be, there are various ways, or you could be focused on someone, as I am, let's
say to you, but I also may be aware of my peripheral field.
And I'm aware of you so that it's something that if I were a martial artist, I can't
do that, so that even when I'm attending selectively, someone could enter the room and I would see
them enter the room.
This is...
There's no animals going to survive if they can.
No, I know, but yeah, I'll make a distinction.
Cats, cats, and dog...
I mean, again, I know cats and...
Some cats and dogs pretty well.
Cats are very, very alert in various ways, but they are...
I think this is going to elicit a lot of controversy.
They are subconsciously alert.
They can't be consciously alert by definition.
Oh, wait a minute.
I don't understand that.
Yeah, perhaps, but I'm going to make it.
And I've written a whole book on this subject.
Well, having written a book on this subject actually doesn't make it any less unfounded.
Yeah, yeah.
Okay.
You know, the fact that we don't have any...
It's like we have like...
That's just that lovely thing, which we do with each other when we don't know something
about a topic like the mind of a bird that we just assume there's nothing in there, or
that it's just going to be some variation of ours.
I get that, but it's as if now I'm saying...
It's not that I get that, but it's that is...
The core of your question, you're saying like the difference is...
And I could be wrong, so please, correct me.
But you're saying the difference is that animals might be alert and yet...
Something that's happening, the periphery, sort of that mindful in the moment thing, but
the difference is that we are conscious and animals are not conscious.
However, I can't know that I'm right about saying that animals are not conscious, but
that doesn't matter.
Let me...
I'll tell you why I think there's a...
The distinction to me is...
I don't think I'm making an unwarranted assumption.
I'll say why.
Because we all know...
We've all...
I assume everyone here has handled infants and sees how an infant...
So very often, let's say a four or five month old infant is highly alert.
Do you think that the infant has a sense of self?
In my experience, an infant has a sense of self in the way that we do.
The consciousness that we ascribe to humans to add to humans, in general, I would not
ascribe but to a four month old.
I don't...
Say that we do not know if an animal, if a child has a sense of self at that age, now
the way we define it, it seems because we're using specific experiment...
With the five year old...
One could...
But there's a lot more...
They don't pass certain tests.
That's fair.
That suggests that these kids at four to six months old, and I wish I skimmed just the
abstract of this paper.
I wish I had read it before coming here.
But there was something to do with, you know, attributing something or other.
And they were showing this in a six month old through a looking task.
The surprise about something or other.
It's not just...
But since somebody else was doing this, they were checking the...
The cathekin and EKG type thing.
And the brain was triggering in the way that it would only trigger if the child was very
much aware of what it thought the other person was going to do.
It's like the...
Okay.
It was something like the person was looking at a box and the person...
And you put a ball into the box and the cover went over it.
And the thing was either the surreptitiously taken off or taken off in view or something.
And the child was either surprised or not at whether the person was going to go for the
ball because they should or should not think the ball was there.
I'm doing this in a very sloppy way, but I'm trying to give you a feeling for this experiment.
The point was that the child's brain responded the same way an adult's brain would respond
in that situation based on an attribution of what they thought this other person would
expect to find in the box.
Okay.
Which, when I read that, I went, I want to read the whole paper because...
They didn't even have the motor skills and the cognitive wear with all to express it.
I mean, comprehension proceeds production in terms of language.
They're stuck.
I mean, when we look at animals, we're like looking at pre-verbal babies.
You know, so...
Just to read down, we are going in a different direction which has to do with the issue of
consciousness.
But since it's four o'clock, we will stop.
Ah.
So, please, here, make your comments brief.
Don't make three different comments.
Just one.
Otherwise.
Otherwise.
Yeah.
I stopped at consciousness.
I didn't plan on this, but just a couple of quick observations.
Just one.
Just one.
Please.
The mic's not wrong.
Well...
It's half of the time I'm making one.
I'm just talking about the other side.
It occurs to me, and I can't be sure that there's been a sense that the understanding
of the design is not taking into account the visceral understanding of geologic time and
everything that they've designed.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Okay.
So, I'll just...
So, that...
It's easy to think that a forum is in a non-changeable or final state if we don't consider it evolution.
We consider it evolutionary time over hundreds of millions of years.
We can use those numbers, but we have no macroscopic or cognitive experience of those timeframes.
Quick story to illustrate this.
There's a group of people called the Bajou.
They're on houseboats.
They only come to land to trade, fish for their boats.
Their children spend so much time underwater that they see more clearly underwater and
then they do in out of water.
They have fish hunters that can do things without weights, without any apparatus that
allow them to go down to 80 feet, slow their heartbeat to 30 beats a minute, and stay to
8 minutes.
And if one runs that out over thousands or more of years, you can see physiological
changes in what appears to be an end state of design.
So that's just the comment.
And then the other is that about the speciality is that a few months ago I'll send the paper
to anyone who hasn't seen it or wants it.
Apparently it looks pretty, pretty, there's a single mutation in a single gene gave rise
to our neocortical complexity over time and that develops at a rate roughly 300% fast
in the rest of our physiology.
So that accounts for some of the things you were talking about.
That said, here's the question.
It's an ethical question because we didn't, we didn't.
And this is Sandra, Diana and Irene.
If we got to the point of being able, using epigenetics and other biosynthetic techniques,
to modify that corresponding gene, if it exists, or in non-human species such that we could
artificially accelerate the development of their neocortex, this would be, of course,
vertebrates insephalization, would that be something that any of you would consider doing?
And if not, why not?
I love it.
Well if it was a pit like takeout.
But an injection, I'm not having anything to do with it.
Well, I agree.
I mean, for the speech study, the most dogs, I mean again, I am, it can be a little parochial
intentionally, cognitively in my response.
But I think that part of what works for them is actually not being self-sufficient.
I mean, it is their dependency on it and therefore giving them something which kind of promoted
their ability to evolve beyond us would not be useful for that species or to my feeling.
I wanted to just link that to the difference, the one difference between us and everything
and the other species is that we have this remarkably complex abstract language and then
we can then categorize and refer to the world even if the correspondence with what we've
modeled is not reliable, but that complexity of our linguistic capability is really what
sets us apart as far as we can tell because no one else is giving, no parents are yet giving
talks at Columbia.
Okay.
I'd love to be able to talk that way and also that I really want to be silenced by the
way.
Oh God, what if they had language?
Oh, they'd be impossible, wouldn't they?
I enjoy very much hearing about the tests that you ran measuring the intellectual intelligence
of other species.
I'm wondering if anyone is doing any work measuring the emotional intelligence in other
species.
It's extremely difficult and I'll say it because when we would, if we tried to do that, we
would be even worse at imposing our patterns on them.
So for example, I can work with the burden, I'll say stop doing that, you're going to
get bitten and the student says how do you know that?
And I said look at the body language.
Okay, the feathers are ruffled, the eyes are slitted, the head of the parent versus the
back of that.
I'm reading his body language.
Now is he angry?
Is he bored?
I don't know why he's what emotional underpinning is going on, but I can read the behavior.
And I kind of joke about it that even as humans we're really rotten about understanding what
somebody else is doing and interpreting it appropriately.
I mean you'll go to your significant other and say why did you say that?
Well I didn't mean to say it that way.
I didn't remember that.
And so it's really hard to do this emotional thing because we're so bad at it as humans
with one another to impose it on animals I find it's just harder.
I mean we can read the behavior.
We know what behavioral actions are going to lead to other actions, but that underlying
emotional...
I think next time you have to bring your significant others.
Well I no longer have one.
I no longer have a human one.
There's a reason for that.
I agree with Irene although I think that as a scientist what we try to do is increase
our powers of observation and our ability to sort of bring together a lot of maybe anecdotal
information and look at it more systematically.
So for example with dolphins or ant elephants in our field we can watch responses to the
death of a conspecific another of their own group.
And again we don't know what it means, but what you'll see often is things that look
very much like grieving in humans.
If it's an example is you have eight dolphins in a facility, two are bonded, Spock and Shiloh.
I'll just give goofy names.
Spock dies.
Shiloh is the one in the group that stops eating, starts sulking and takes a week to
start eating and getting with the other animals again.
And you know when we look at it in human terms it looks like grief.
What it is to an animal may be...
Or maybe physiological disturbances, all sorts of stressors.
But that's sort of where we are.
We try to look more systematically at that.
We can look at signs for what we would say are empathy or caregiving or perspective taking
in dolphins and elephants and binobos, other animals and dogs.
You'll see behavior where an animal is injured or ill and the others will give caregiving,
will hold them up at the surface.
They don't all do it, they don't always do it.
It's very flexible.
It's often to the ones they're closest with.
They'll often do something to provide care.
So when we look at those kinds of things or look at a paper came out last year by Plotnik
and Duval where they looked at one elephant showing conciliatory behavior to another that
was distressed.
They put their trunk around the animal and they look at how that happens.
Again, we don't know what's going on in the emotional world of those animals.
But what we do know is they...
Many animals have...
From rats to elephants to dolphins have similar sub-portical areas in their brain that respond
emotionally in different ways to fear, to caring, for young and other things.
So there's some interesting similarities, whether it's the same kind of emotion, but
maybe that doesn't make a difference if it's the same because we would never know if it's
the same.
How do you know if it's ever going to be the same?
You know, my question that I asked before you just touched on it, that you said when the
other dolphin is not eating and so on, you said it may not...
We don't know what the emotion is, but it may be some physiological response.
But that's also true with humans, right?
Yeah.
In that sense, we are identical, but we secondarily may have explanations for what we are doing.
Right.
And also animals, many animals show ulcers under conditions.
And for us, it can come from different things, bacterial.
I'm going to approach this from another angle because I'm coming from another field.
I'm a painter and art historian.
And I'm interested in...
Painters often say, I'm only a link in a chain.
I'm an individual, but I'm carrying on things that have happened in the past and the history
of others.
So carrying within one is the history of other actions, other developments.
So the mind is not just a sound, it's an entity, it's an entity, a depository of history,
of all kinds.
And therefore, that creates a form of evolution or development, a different kind of form,
but it's a form that we are building constantly on others' lives who have gone through a conscious
life.
And I wonder how you can relate that to the animal kingdom, this history and culture in
which an individual life is beyond their life because they have imbibed other lives, other
consciousness.
Great question.
Anything?
A bird song dialect.
I mean, the birds will learn their area.
It's a cultural tradition.
We get a little bit for individual differences.
That's their little take on it.
But it's a cultural tradition.
And you can see the changes over time.
You can see the evolution of these things based on what's happening in the world.
I mean, if the area that they're living in gets more tree-like, they'll have to shift
frequencies a little bit and things like that.
I mean, that's one version of it.
I went to graduate school with a number of people who believed and espoused that the unit
of interest was really not the cognition and the brain, but a distributed cognition of
a group.
And that's how they studied.
How do people work together in a group?
It's not one person who's solving the problems.
I, as a human and a tool user, speak most of the tools, which I use.
I let somebody else make them.
And so it makes more sense to talk about the cognition of a group.
And you can define the group variously.
And I think, in some ways, lots of different animal societies could also be described that
way.
And that is a kind of historical cognition.
In other words, the group operates because lots of different members have different roles
or understandings such that, as an entire group, they have a cognitive ability.
I think that might be one way to recast the type of thing you're talking about, such
that it might be relevant for humans and non-humans.
I think the idea of also matriarchs, the older females, there's data coming out showing that
an elephant societies and in cetacean societies, that these female matriarchs seem to carry
the knowledge.
And that's passed down.
There's increasing evidence for cultural within these societies.
But this matriarch, the non-reproductive female, leads the group in Africa to the right places
based on seasons and things.
And when those animals from poaching or whatever has detrimental effects on the groups, taking
out males that are male elephants by poachers have effects on the acculturation and control
of the younger males.
So these key roles are important, but carrying the knowledge, having a real effect on behavior
of others around you.
I think it's a great point.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Do you not see anything about this?
Boy, there's little bits of evidence here and there of this kind of cultural transmission,
but you don't really find it in humans until you get to pretty modern humans.
I think you have, you could trump me here on this, but I think much like technology in
the Bronze Age, I think art in the Bronze Age are through thousands of years remained
relatively similar.
All made artifacts for thousands of years, the artifacts all look sort of the same.
But now we have, now the arts are changing all the time.
I mean, they move at a much more rapid pace.
And that is nothing to do with evolution.
That is a cultural thing that humans do.
They move at a more rapid pace.
Maybe the concept of the individual, which evolve through time, has also changed things
in that way.
And that an individual feels that within themselves, a da Vinci or even earlier than
that, can add a whole new dimension that this given, that aren't part of the canon of an
age.
But I think there's always been change.
I don't think the Bronze Age was, I think it was a slower evolution, but it was there.
I don't believe there's any stagnant period ever.
I don't believe in vacuums.
But the concept of the individual, individual life, did change that.
Yes.
I hope I won't be too unpopular.
If I start out by correcting two things that graded on my ears like fingernails on a
fingernail.
One being that there could be some evolution of human intelligence in the last 5,000 years,
which will be 5,000 years is nothing in human evolution.
They're talking about the emergence of a kind of mental…
Between 100,000.
So you don't get…
We changed it to 50 million.
You don't get upset.
No, no, now you weigh up.
No, now you weigh on the other side.
But we did weigh up.
We said just the opposite.
I just want to be clear.
We said just the opposite.
It couldn't possibly be evolution in 5,000 years.
All right.
But I mean, they were building pyramids.
They were quite as intelligent as we are.
Have the same exact brain we have now?
5,000, we believe it.
We won't quibble over the time.
But the paintings, the
scale paintings and the shawty paintings were between 30,000 and 40 years ago.
Neanderthals were still…
We just discovered some new kinds of tools and possibly art in the rudiments of Neanderthals
that died out 40,000 years ago.
I leave that topic now.
Everything that bothered me was the idea of being upright somehow facilitates the kind
of intelligence that we have.
I needed to think that we had at least 17 different kinds of hominins wandering around
the world that were all more or less upright.
And only Homo sapiens came up with what we think we have.
Antipythicists were creatures like aridipithecus, ramidus and Australopithecus.
All of these creatures could walk.
They had good hands.
In fact, it's generally understood by anthropology now that walking upright was not correlated
with intelligence at all.
The intelligence came way after they were all of these upright hominins walking around.
Look at bono.
They're all for instance.
They often walk upright.
They're very bright.
They don't do art.
They don't do life.
So it cannot be…
But they're not upright.
So I'm not sure why you…
They're not actually upright.
So what do you mention?
Oh, they're very often upright.
No, I mean, they're not a fully upright.
I thought you were referring to a fully upright.
Well, as fully upright.
I'm talking about fully upright.
I'm talking about fully upright.
I thought you just said homo sapiens.
They're all these people.
I don't mean to be disrespectful.
I want to be polite.
But you're totally off the beam.
You don't have a grasp of the range of upright creatures that did not…
I don't understand.
You're talking about bipedalism.
We're the only fully upright species.
There's no debate on this among scientists.
We're the only fully upright species.
Well, there is debate about it.
But I want to drop it now.
I want to drop it.
I want to drop it.
I want to drop it now.
You can read my book.
And maybe my book is totally wrong too.
Paul Garvin's universe.
What I really want to bring up is this.
Because I've been fortunate for the last three years to be the director of a project
on Alfred Russell for the Templeland Foundation.
You may not know him.
Some of you may know he was Darwin's junior.
He was the man that came up with the idea of evolution by natural selection to shorten
the story.
In time, Darwin did.
They published it together.
They share co-credit.
But they had a very interesting detail in him.
And that difference of opinion was that Wallace, who was a great naturalist, out in the field
for many years, observed many animals, he drew what I call a white picket fence around
human mentality, around human consciousness, around human cognition.
He thought that natural selection could not account the kind of consciousness that he's
talking about.
And Darwin said, what do you mean?
Everything goes by gradual steps.
There's no great leaps.
And Wallace, I said you don't understand natural selection.
Wallace said, I'm the inventor of it along with you.
I understand natural selection.
And what natural selection says is that a trait has to have a utility to an organism
in order to be a person.
Now if you have an ape, said Wallace, wandering around and eating lizards, and like a girl
that's well surviving and having a social group and having all kinds of behavior, why
would he need to have methadry, why would he need to have methadry, why would he need
to even need to have the sophistication of language beyond a very, very basic thing.
And he said, you can't, an animal cannot develop something in advance of its needs.
And Darwin wrote him a famous letter in 18th and said, I hope you have not murdered too
completely your own and my child, meaning natural selection.
Wallace wrote many books on this later, The Place of Man in Nature, The World of Life,
and so on, in which he continued to steam.
And you talked about the potential source.
Wallace thought there was special source.
Wallace thought there was an infusion of spirit from an unseen universe of spirit, a cosmic
intelligence.
He never used the word God.
He did not like organized religion, but he thought there was some kind of intelligence
in nature, guiding evolution and responsible for infusing and injecting in humans this
what some call emergent quality that was more than the sum of its parts.
This is not a question and I don't want to hog the floor.
I've said my piece.
Thank you.
Thank you.
That was interesting.
That was interesting and fun.
Thank you.
