So I will introduce the participants today.
I will not go through everything here because I think all of you have already.
So just a summary of things.
Priyambhada Natarayan is a professor of astronomy and physics at Yale University.
And her research is focused on exotica in the universe, dark matter, dark energy and black holes.
She is obviously very prominent in her field and also holds professorships at the Tico Brea,
Sophie and Tico Brea professorships at the Niels Bohr Institute in Copenhagen, Denmark,
and honorary professorships at the University of Delhi in India.
Tim Modlin has been here before with us and so has Tim.
Tim is a professor of philosophy at New York University and his most recent books are philosophy of physics, space and time,
and new foundations for physical geometry.
Dorothy Vamyukke, I think is her first time here.
She is professor of Germanic languages at Columbia University and she has just a number of books that are listed here.
Her latest book, which I guess is not out yet, is on changing models of authorship and creativity in the arts and sciences during the long 18th century.
So with that, I'll let you start.
There's no, okay, I thought we were going to be close to questions.
No questions?
You've got a whole list of questions here.
So I guess I was curious about trying to understand whether the way the theme was posed to us.
I read it as whether there are fundamental limits that may prevent extension of knowledge beyond certain points.
And so from the vantage point of cosmology, so there's sort of obvious limitations.
First, in the sense that there's a limit to observation, in the sense because the speed of light is finite,
there's only a portion of the universe that is observable to us at any given time.
So given the finite age of the universe and finite speed of light, there is what is called an observable horizon.
So you are not privy to what is happening beyond, you have no knowledge of what's happening beyond that current horizon.
Of course that horizon shifts as time goes on, so a billion years later, more of the universe will come into view.
But at any given point, there's sort of a hard boundary of where you cannot get any information from.
And of course in quantum mechanics, we also know that Heisenberg's uncertainty principle tells you that you cannot simultaneously know the position and momentum of an object simultaneously.
So there's like one can sort of view that sort of as a limit.
So there's a limit to sort of observation, then there's a limit because I mean I'm thinking about cosmos and cosmic scales.
There's also a limit to travel, right, so question of sort of interstellar, interspace travel.
And that of course again has to do with, it's not just a technological limitation.
It has to do with a human lifespan.
The fact is even if we have the technology that could propel us outside the solar system and take us to planets and on other stars and so on and so forth,
the fundamental limitation is that there is a finite human lifespan and we can't circumvent that.
Even if we come up with ways to fuel rockets that can fly for 10,000 years or whatever power, right, so sort of thinking about that and then-
And we're saying there is a limitation also to human lifespan?
No, the human lifespan being what it is will contain, will necessarily give you a limit on travel.
I understand that, but are you saying there's no way to extend human lifespan beyond a certain point?
There may be. I'm not sure if it will be enough to take us to planets around other stars.
Because you know the point is now we're finding all these so-called habitable planets around other stars.
The question, you know, at least for someone like me, the first question is, is there any means by which we will actually reach it?
And then you realize that there's a fundamental limitation, you wouldn't.
Then if you look at sort of limits to- there are limits to the kinds of energies at which you could build colliders, like at CERN, the LHC.
You know, you can go up by factor of 10, factor of 100 and so on.
So this sort of fundamental limit in terms of the time that it is going to take to build something like that, like how many generations, but it's spent.
Of course, as well as cost and all those sort of practical things.
But once again, you know, sort of the human lifespan comes into view when you look at trying to understand the constituents of the cosmos.
So, you know, I was really looking from that point of view, trying to understand our place in the universe and stuff like that.
And then the question, the one point that I think is very interesting is sort of the limit limits on thought.
So, and I think that's where one of the reasons, you know, everyone's teasing me about my notes is that, you know, trying to stay focused and stable in my own opinion.
There's a bit of me that feels that there is no reason to believe that human cognitive capacity should be infinite.
There are billions and billions of nerve cells, but the fact they're not infinite.
And although the brain is plastic and it does morph and it does learn, even as we age and now we know that, it's not clear to me that it responds fast enough given, you know, what remains to be understood.
So, that's like a fundamental limit that comes from just complexity, sheer complexity of whether we have the cognitive apparatus to fathom and all the complexity.
And I think I'm not sure that we do.
I mean, I see no reason to believe why we do.
Well, should I?
Let me just jump in and respond or say some things maybe in the general area.
I mean, I have two backgrounds, one in philosophy and one more in physics.
Of course, if you're a philosopher, you're going to say the limit to human knowledge is that we have pretty much none of it about anything.
That is, all of our beliefs are tentative to some degree.
You could say we have tremendous amount of evidence for things, but we know sometimes well in trench beliefs get overthrown later.
So, part of it is just to say we should always be very tentative to some degree or a little bit humble about anything we think we know.
So, it's more a question of limits on evidence, limits on reasons to believe.
And then the second thing I suppose, when you talk about limits, it sounds like, gee, that's a terrible thing.
But you want to stop and ask for a second what you really care about because there may be things which we won't know.
But on further reflection, we don't care all that much about.
I could pick out a tree in Central Park and say nobody knows how many leaves there are.
And I guess in principle, you could go count them, but nobody's going to, right?
By next spring, nobody will ever know. It's kind of a piece of trivia.
So, there's a whole lot of trivia about the universe.
And we shouldn't be too upset.
Then there are more fundamental issues we'd really like to have settled.
And the limits there are very interesting.
I'll just mention one thing to show you how tricky it is in physics,
pre-existing the Heisenberg uncertainty relation, which probably most people have heard of one way or another,
and described it this way that you can't simultaneously know, say, the position and momentum of a particle,
which you also might think is kind of a bit of trivia.
But even the way that's phrased is contentious.
The way it's phrased, it suggests that a particle always has a definite position in momentum,
and we just can't know them both at the same time.
But some understandings of quantum theory say, no, that's not the right way to think about it.
The right way to think about it is that particles just don't have them both at the same time.
So, there's nothing we're ignorant of.
Now, that's going to differ on different understandings of the theory,
and then that leads us to the question, can we settle that dispute?
Can we decide between different fundamental physical pictures of the universe?
And the interesting thing there is that, I think Einstein pointed this out,
how much you can find out about the physical world is itself the function of what the physical laws are.
You sort of have to ask the theory of how much you can know about the world,
because we only acquire information by physical interaction with the world.
So, the physics itself can put limits on what an inquirer can find out about the physics,
or the physics itself could, as it were, put us in a position where we can't know what the, be sure what the physics is.
So, I think those are very interesting, because I actually just personally care about knowing the fundamental laws of nature
more than the leaves on the treaties.
That's the kind of thing that worries me a bit.
How do you react to that? Well, if that's the way the world is, you live with it.
There's lots of things about the world you wish could be different.
And I think we'll only know when we have, you know, we'll continue the search.
Do you wish to know more? I would like to know what the fundamental laws of nature are.
Well, that's an interesting, I mean, that's just part of my intellectual character.
I mean, I was bouncing around doing the philosophy, why philosophy?
Because somehow you get down to the bottom of everything, right?
And then doing some science and you say, oh, biology, that's interesting, but really it's just chemistry.
You know, chemistry, that's interesting, but really it's just physics.
Okay, what's really physics?
Now, lots of people could feel differently.
They could feel, I just really enjoy studying cells and I couldn't care less about electrons.
But that same kind of desire to somehow, in a certain sense, get to the very bottom.
That's why I'm interested.
Well, you don't mean that anything would change.
If you knew that, you mean that you just are interested in that?
Nothing would, I have a desire to know the facts, those particular facts.
I would be pleased if I could find them out.
The rest of my life would go on as usual, make breakfast the same way.
You know, my interactions with people would be the same, my political views wouldn't change.
You could say, all of this is a little bit, you know, isolated from lots of other big questions in life.
But it's something that just fascinates me.
Yeah, I'm probably the further the loss of nature in the universe since I'm in literature and intellectual history.
But when I thought about the topic we're discussing, I couldn't help but think, well, the limitations are not just negative.
As you pre-up brought up the issue of increasing complexity, whenever you study something,
you reach a point where you need to reduce the complexity.
And you bring up the question of the limited lifespan of human being,
and in a way the opacity of the observation process.
So I thought it's probably productive also to think about these limitations in terms of the situatedness
of any situation of knowledge, production, knowledge, communication.
It's the language on institutions that have their power.
And whenever we declare something to be an important research program that deserves funding
or that should be taught rather than something else,
their interests that have their own institutional dynamics and political ramifications.
So, and then they are culturally historically changing conventions of what constitutes objectivity,
what constitutes facts, what constitutes evidence.
And I was going to propose to think about the limitations of knowledge in terms of
situatedness of the production of knowledge, which I guess cannot be denied.
And maybe also consider its social communicative dimension.
You want to bring the math perspective?
Well, I want to bring something in.
I'd like to look at the first question, which is a fundamental here.
It says, what about the universe and how do we know it?
And I want to start off by a Jewish joke, which may not be so funny,
but I think it illustrates something about this.
You have these two disciples of two famous rabbis,
and some God forsaken little town in Poland,
and one of them is saying how wonderful their teachers are.
And one of them says, I know, I know that my teachers,
hello, yes, the mic doesn't work, I'll speak louder, okay?
Anybody can hear me?
Mike is not working, he's working.
Well, anyway, maybe if I speak louder, everybody can hear me.
He's going to check the amplifier, I think.
I'll speak louder.
Okay, so,
I know that my rabbi is an absolutely incredibly miraculous person.
He just, it says, it's just wonderful.
What do you mean? What's so wonderful?
What's the, I mean, many, many things, but just last month.
Just last month we had this one.
We had this remarkable thing happening here.
I'll tell you, what happened?
We were headed out daily prayer, and suddenly the rabbi in the middle of the prayer
screamed out and said, this is horrible, this is terrible.
The chief rabbi of Prague has just died, he's just died.
In the middle of the service he had collapsed and died,
and everybody was shocked, and they immediately organized a party to get there
funeral, which has to be done very quickly. So they got some horsemen, six horsemen, and
they were riding. You can imagine they were riding day and night, and everybody was praying
that they could make it. And amazingly enough, by dawn, they got all the way to Prague. And
it was just wonderful. And I said, well, but that's great now, did they? So they actually
got to the funeral? Because, well, it turns out that the rabbi didn't really die. It was
fine. So what's so wonderful about that? Because you idiot, you don't understand anything.
It has nothing to do with whether the rabbi died or not. It's how far this great man
can see. So I think that this is my opinion. This is a very, this is a common, oh, this
matter, that we are, we're trying, what is knowledge? I mean, we, what do people know?
This disciple knew his rabbi. He was a wonderful man. Okay. So what, what is it that, I mean,
this fellow knew his rabbi very well, and you know everything, and he was an intelligent
guy, and he knew that he thought that he was a great man for many reasons. And he was one
of the examples. So all the way, and somehow things didn't quite work out at the end. That's
a small thing. It's a small experimental kind of variation. So I think, I think that knowledge
is something what we know is something very tricky. What, what is it? I mean, we, you
know, you pick up a phone and you hear somebody speaking and you know exactly who it is. Why?
I mean, the, his voice has been cut up into millions of pieces, a lot of things. And there's
something about it that you know the person. There are lots of things that you, that you
sort of know in some kind of way, which you can't really verbalize, or even write down.
It's, I would say there is, so you, you're in this, we're sort of in a kind of a fog,
and we have a way of perceiving certain signals. And then we say, I think we, then we have
to, our psychology tells us, we have to feel that we know something. You know, we, we sort
of feel that we, you know, we know very well that we're going to dive very soon, but we
somehow feel, extend things and we know that somehow we assume on the daily basis that
it's going to keep going on. A lot, lots of things inside us that make us, make us feel
that we know things. Now there is, there's a mathematical component to all this also,
but I, maybe I'll return to that later. And that is how you go from knowing some things
to knowing something else by logic. And that, that I think is a very important thing that
plays, plays a very important role in every kind of study of understanding things, mathematical
or not. There's that crucial step from going to, from, from, from something to, from something
that we think we know to something else by logic. And perhaps I'll, perhaps I'll discuss
that a little later.
So maybe, let me just make it. I mean, I think we do want to, there's a very difficult question,
which is both has to do with institutional structures and these sorts of things where
you might say, how do we know? How, how is knowledge produced? It's, how do we get the
evidence? As you say, recognizing someone's voice, can you really articulate? And that
may be very difficult, but I, I at least want to put on the other side not to get too lost
in that fog, because at least you can check whether certain claims, things are reliable.
I mean, I'm, I'm reminded of the great magician James Randy, who would challenge people who
claim to know all sorts of things that you would say, I don't know how they know them
because they were sort of like, or I mean, you know, extra sensory perception or someone,
is it that we're supposed to be outside the ambit of scientific explanation and the beauty
of it was that Randy wouldn't engage in the question of how, how could that possibly work,
but he could come up with nice experiments to see whether it does work. So I remember
once someone said they could see your aura, right, they could see sticking up a few inches
above your head and aura and it had different colors and on the basis of the colors you
could tell about your personality. And Randy said, okay, fine. And he had a set of boxes,
set up 10 boxes where the person would stand so their head was just below the box, right.
But if there was a three inch aura flowing out of them, however they could do it, the
aura sear could see the aura sticking up the top of the box and he'd say, okay, let's have
somebody come stand and you tell us where they're standing. That's a great test, right? And
what you find is that that person actually can't see anything at all. So how we know
is a very tricky question. Sometimes that we know or that something is good evidence or
a way of approaching things is reliable or not reliable, we can get at in a somewhat
more humble way. The world would be a lot better if there was a bit more of that.
I think it's quite clear that there's the experiential, and I'm not saying that they
are sort of binaries or they're in opposition. There's the experiential view of this question
and then there's the experimental view of how we know. And there is a well developed
scheme of garnering reliable knowledge of phenomena, reliable replicable knowledge,
that certifies what we know is there. So I think it's at least we know one way of knowing
that is not as foggy, sort of the scientific experimental observational way. And of course
you know the questions that you brought up are that this observation is an entirely
objective, who we are, interferes, then there's the issue of what a measurement device actually
does because you're convolving the phenomenon via the device that you're using to actually
study the phenomenon. So there's all of that, but still, I think as Tim pointed out, that
we do have one very reliable scheme, experimental scheme within science of producing knowledge.
So you would limit knowledge, experimental scientific knowledge? No, but I think that
I wouldn't limit it, but I think that there's at least one kind of knowledge that we understand
quite well how it's produced, how it's replicated in its complications and its stability, its
provisionality. We have a whole understanding of how when you learn something new, you have
new evidence, you have many different independent lines of new evidence, you revise your understanding
of phenomena. So you know, that process within science of generating knowledge and facts is
sort of a nice well-oiled machine, are we understanding? No, I understand. But then you
limit right now, you limit your definition of knowledge to the we of the scientific community
trained in that procedure. And I guess the question you would want to ask is limitations
between disciplines and the communication between disciplines of scientific knowledge
production. And then I guess you would also want to ask about whether you actually want
to limit that we as trained scientists. Right. I mean, I'm only giving a perspective. I'm
not saying that this is limited in any way. There's obviously other ways of knowing and
other knowledge. But I think the scientific one is an interesting one to jump into and
to use as a lens to look at the other ways of knowing is because in science there is
the issue of limits that come from intractability, i.e. the apparatus, the methods of thinking
that you've developed are inadequate at this particular time to study in better detail.
And the fact that there are different kinds of intractability. So for example, we have
when you do climate models, right? So it's quite possible we have models which we understand
well enough, including their limitations of what the average temperature would be on
earth in 2025, for example. However, we will never ever be able to predict what will the
average temperature be in New Haven where I live on 13 December 2025 or New York, for
that matter. Right. So cold.
So there's that kind of intractability, right? And the question is, will you be able to
build a better model? Will you get a more sophisticated model? Or will there always
be some fundamental uncertainties imposed by the complexity of a problem? So I think
the kinds of intractability that you have in science are different from the intractability
that you would have, for example, other disciplines, right? So for example, you put on average
no, so if you look at anthropology, right, when on average you could probably tell what
the diet of someone 4000 years ago was on average if you have fossils. But if you had
their skeleton, you could figure out what you can't say what they actually literally
ate on a given day, right? So that kind of, I think, crosses disciplines. But then there
are other kinds of intractability that don't quite cross. And I think that's sort of the
kinds of intractability.
Well, I certainly agree with what you say, but being sort of skeptical of mine, how can
you be so sure that we won't know exactly what the temperature will be 100 years from
now? I mean, right now we don't know how to do it. But who knows? Maybe they will come
up with some method where he'll understand exactly how things work and we will predict
temperature will be within 10 degrees or whatever. You know, the intractability depends on what
we have right now. Somebody may discover some weird thing, which, you know, I've heard,
an example, I've heard a student in the 50s, I've heard people coming on and people were
discussing how it would be absolutely impossible to analyze the game of chess in a kind of
a way that you sort of list the games and make these trees like they do now. Because
it would be such a huge amount of information that you would need that just inconceivable
that people do that. So the only way you could have computers play chess is somehow to emulate
the human thinking and intuition and so on. There was a whole discussion of that and everybody
agreed. Well, it turned out that those limits were surpassed and you can do it the crude
way of just listing all the games or try to list partially all the games and now computers
pay very good chess. So I think that there is an intractability but to predict what it
is is a dangerous ground. But that intractability has to do with enumeration, right? So it's a
quantitative thing. Right. If you can map out the kinds of intractability I'm talking
about are sort of chaos, right? In a complex system. But in the end, in the end, that's
the point that you can, once you reduce things to enumeration, then you have a chance and
a lot of things that we thought cannot be reduced to enumeration can be in fact reduced to enumeration.
So it can never be structured. No, of course not. But to say now what it is that won't
be able to within 10 years is dangerous grounds. So I want to be contrary to whatever it is.
No, I mean, I think the kinds of problems that I had in mind were sort of problems where
you know chaos sets in and so some small fluctuation can give you a completely unpredictable outcome.
And in such an unpredictable outcome that you don't, you are actually incapable of constructing
a probability distribution function of finite outcomes. You're not able to enumerate those
outcomes in some kind of distribution. So I think there are a lot of problems. Definitely
I gave the climate one because I knew that, you know, that's a good one because we know
there that there are, it's such a complex problem and there's so many different variables
that we don't understand the nonlinear coupling. What we do know about nonlinear coupling is
that the system can get chaotic and therefore unpredictable outcomes which cannot be enumerated.
Well, I don't want to finish my point. I'll just come in here again on the question of
what is it we want to know, right? What is it? There was now it admittedly it might
be practically useful to know the exact temperature in New Haven in 10 years on a certain day
if you're planning a party. But you know, you might think, you know, from another point
of view, again, you might treat that, something we will find out that's certainly not a limit
to knowledge, it's a limit to predictability maybe. But you also might say from a certain
point of view of understanding of comprehension, if you think you have the basic fundamentals
of the system right and you can analyze it far enough to see as you say it's chaotic system,
it's dynamics, and this is what people always call the butterfly effect, right? In some systems
a tiny little change in the state now will amplify out to very big changes later. Just
knowing that is a kind of understanding of the system. It's an understanding that makes
prediction very difficult. But on the other hand, if what you're after is a kind of just
general comprehension, you might say that's fine, even though it doesn't satisfy all my
practical needs. So again, what the limits are and whether they're limits, how sad should
we be about the limits, I guess we ought to be a little careful about. I'll just make
one quick comment because Dorothea started out talking about the sociological factors
and so on in. There's maybe a small danger of the term knowledge production because in
a way you would think knowledge requires two things. Knowledge requires a theory which
is the thing you're claiming you might know or at least have good reason to believe and
it requires evidence which is the grounds on which you accept or reject the theory.
And certainly sociological considerations can play a big role and may be different in different
fields about theory production. So you might say theories in a certain literary criticism
I don't know a lot about but my impression is approaches to literary criticism, the kinds
of theories people have produced have changed quite radically from decade to decade. But
the more theory production seems to depends on sociological considerations, the more worried
you're going to be that none of this is going to produce knowledge because the more you can
produce just wildly different kinds of theories the more worried you're going to be well which
one's right or any of them right or if the kinds of theories can be pushed around by
this by the sociological situation very easily what makes you think they're being pushed in
a direction to being being correct. So whether in certain realms you think you're even after
the kind of thing we would call evidentially based theory that pre is after for understanding
dark matter I mean maybe some disciplines aren't after that at all maybe a literary critic might
say look there's not going to be a correct or incorrect theory of what this text is about
we're just trying out different approaches to reading and seeing how we like them and how
you know satisfying we how satisfied we feel and that asking for evidence whether this is the
right way to do it is even the right kind of thing so there you might have a limitation of a
different kind because it's not exactly a truth directed enterprise but directed at something
slightly different from that I mean I'm not sure how you think about your own field in this regard.
Well my question was I didn't want to assume that knowledge is reserved to one domain say
the natural sciences or the social sciences or the humanities my assumption would be that a
fundamental concept of knowledge is very different in say those three domains with different
methodologies and different theories but I would still say within say science without me having
studied beyond high school science you have in the sciences just as much as in the humanities or
in the social sciences if you just look at the institutions of higher learning you have funding
initiatives you have priorities that are set and you have decisions sometimes at a national level
not to pursue a field to drop a field or to revive a field and you have more or less application
driven motion of certain field where you have the creation of spaces where people can do less
applied sciences I'm not telling you anything new but it seems to me whoops it seems to me that
continuously as projects grants are articulated these considerations how it will be funded whether
it will be funded how these decisions are made play into the articulation of the question
and I'm not the one to say this is a priori bad but I think it plays into the limitations of that
kind of knowledge production as a collective and I think it has just as much in the sciences in
that sense a political dimension since it's there that the kind of knowledge whether we care about
it or not whether this rather than that also needs to be communicated to a general public so I don't
think it's an issue of say fashionable literary theories or not but I think it has to do with how
all kind of study is part of a larger social larger society with its political implications
if I may respond here I think there's the issue of what is what is valuable to know and I think
that's where the points that you make are totally valid and they are just a valid in
sciences that are taken constantly I mean we all have worked long enough in major universities to
know that has a political social cultural fashion dimension but I think what the point if I'm
understanding what Tim was saying correctly is that in the humanities and for example this literary
criticism example right there isn't the same kind of scheme for evaluating many explanations or
ordering explanations privileging explanations so in science we have the sort of cycle of experimental
verification replication you know measurement I mean sort of you know empirical interventions
you know however you know there fuzzy in some ways etc but the point is we have a scheme of
ordering explanations and for privileging which one which is correct and which is wrong in which
you can discount whereas in the humanities you don't have the same kind of scheme absolutely not
the humanities about something totally different right so which so the question is that when you
don't have a scheme for privileging one explanation over another the nature of what you create as
knowledge so there's multiple ways of knowing there's always a multiple allowed right if knowledge
wouldn't even be the key operative term in the humanities so I mean I don't know we have a debate
about that yeah yeah I think we agree that you know yeah yeah I would like to raise a philosophy
of questions we have a philosopher here do you should want to distinguish between sort of knowledge
which is sort of restricted to some kind of consciousness or like you have these thinking about
these birds that migrate these tremendous distances and know exactly how to go there and know that
they should do it in certain things is that knowledge or is that what this is okay so yeah this is
what you do in introductory epistemology course right that's what I wonder if we have someone who
speaks a better language than English for this purpose so in English know is multiply ambiguous
and in German you have this in Canon and Canon and you call them different things right so a kind
of practical ability which is what the birds have is a different kind of thing I think I should
take your freshman course yeah yeah you know so so the the kind of old first shot at definition of
knowledge of the kind that philosophers are interested in goes back to a suggestion made in a
platonic dialogue of course it's shot down by Socrates as is every other suggestion but that
that knowledge is something like justified true belief right so in order to know something I have
to believe it to be true I have to believe it it has to be true I can't know falsehoods and I
have to be justified and then there's a lot of this is what I was talking about evidence what are
my grounds what are my you know what what could I say if someone challenged me to back up right give
give reasons for the belief I have that presumably they could share those reasons or criticize them
presumably your birds if I ask you why did you take a right rather than a lot of you know they
have nothing to say I can't criticize them they they have a perfectly good ability and we might be
interested in how they do it but it may very well be that a lot of what we do we can't say about
anything either absolutely I mean I mean Hume wonderfully you know Hume made a wonderful true
observation about human being so Hume was looking at the limits of reason of the human faculty of
human reason and and Hume came to the correct conclusion it's a really good thing that humans
don't try and reason their way through their everyday lives because they die what what we do is we
rely on habit mostly right we just do things unthinkingly because we're actually pretty bad
reasoners I mean or people would die watching Fox News right I mean they would just have
our you know our actual ability to lay out an argument and hear the premises and this follows
from that and this could be questioned is is is is very poor and and we usually don't rely on
that getting around day-to-day life good for us it would be nice to promote a little more of it
but I wasn't very clear because before you came Perry was saying about what limitations there are
at least in terms of cosmology with your comment about prediction your implication is there is
no limitation it's just that we cannot predict now so in 20 years we may be able to say yes
the temperature will be 62 Fahrenheit in September 19 whatever 2000 I firmly believe that very
strong limits extremely strong limits what we can we're just I mean just even in simple things
which we can enumerate they get to be so and so on so I'm very strong limits what I don't believe
is that one can a priori say what those limits are now in other words yes I agree that there are
limits and there are questions that we will not be able to do but to pin down and say and to pin
down and say exactly that in 10 years we will not be able to know this and that okay I say
tomorrow we want that I'll say you're right 10 years maybe 100 years I mean this right what
what the limits are on what we may be able to predict depend on the right theory now you can
show some things with some simplified model so that you know you can show something like this and
this is just now mathematics it's not real physics suppose I had a box of gas and I think of it just
like colliding billiard balls so they're just gonna bounce off each other in a nice elastic way and
if they collide slightly differently they'll bounce slightly differently so you can just model that
system with 10 to the 23rd billiard balls bouncing around and in a kind of Newtonian situation you
ask well suppose I wanted to predict where that particular atom is gonna be in 10 minutes and you
just move a rock on Mars right a little pebble on Mars and you sort of calculate that that little
change in the gravitational force is gonna make this guy collide slightly off and that's gonna make
him bounce off at a slightly different angle and that gets amplified in every collision and you
can sort of say in that model you can show that if you move this pebble on Mars where this atom is
gonna be in 10 minutes will be completely different and if that's correct if that's the right
dynamics for the system then you're gonna say you're never gonna be able to predict where that
atom's gonna go because you'd have to know the exact position of everything you know now now
that's something you know we could find out that some systems are like that and so specific
predictions aren't very the key word gonna come back the key word in this discussion is if yeah
yeah I mean yeah if the conditions are and chances are they are that way you'll never be able to predict but
we don't know I mean maybe there's some what they used to what's called Maxwell's devil or
something that's that's cooking up things so that something will happen in a certain way and some
great genius or some guy was very lucky will stumble and find this and figure out the box that
you presented in which looks like blah blah blah will actually be that everything will concentrate
in one corner and everybody will die because they can't breathe breathe anymore I mean that
right you know so I mean I think that yeah I mean I think that we can say very safely that
the huge amount of stuff that we don't know and we can say there's a huge amount of stuff that we
can never hope to know but we can't really pin down what that's what you know well let's give a
chance you wanted to ask something before well I was wondering whether I'm the only one who's
somehow hesitating as I hear you all debate the limits of knowledge exclusively in terms of
the ability to predict or not whether I mean the three that this is the only limit to knowledge or
the way you imagine limit because so far we've only talked about it that way or you've only talked
about it in terms of the test of the limitations of knowledge would be the incapacity to predict
and that I find I think too poor to think about the limitations of human knowledge and so I actually
I was going to to ask how else apart from the limitations of the capacity to predict does one
want to articulate or think about the limitations of knowledge this is what I was actually I agree
with you I mean I think prediction isn't such such an interesting thing in fact the interesting
thing is it's the opposite side if you're interested like I am on as it were what the fundamental
constituents of the universe are and how they work there are cases where you can have two different
proposals and then show they make the same predictions right so whatever those predictions are
they're going to be identical and then you're in a situation where you say well that means I
can't decide between these observationally right so these are kind of I just agree with that if
you have two systems that when every case will predict the same things then they're equivalent
just to just a way of saying no I say yes that's correct well how else I mean what
how can they be different if they if they how can you possibly have a difference if this if the
ideas lead exactly to the same results in every case because the results are just what happens at
large scale so oh no I can have I thought just you said every case well but what I mean what you could
what it predicts in terms of what's observable which is all we have right yeah right so right so I
can there are string so if it's not if it's not observable if the differences predictions are
not observable then what is what sense does it make you can't can't observe it you might like to
know what it is so for example there are various versions of string theories different versions
of string theories yes that will lead to the final post Big Bang universe that we do see
right to the same universe that we see so we don't know how to discriminate between those two
yes because we because these theories it's not clear exactly what else they predict or don't
predict their sort of ify theories but if you have an example of two theories where you can you
were where in every case what they predict the same thing that observable then I claim the theories
are equivalent no no but I'm giving the same example so the theories predict observables that
are exactly what all we observe in the 13.8 billion years after the Big Bang the point of
discrimination between these two lies beyond right and we have no observational consequence that
we need to be able to discriminate between those two theories and they are fundamentally different
theories they are not the same theory so we we cannot I know this is a real conundrum that
we see but I guess we're not talking on the same I was I was assuming from his comments that we
already that we already know what all these theories predict and and everything they do is the same
but you are saying that these theories we don't really know that differently don't already know
what they will predict and all the things that we know they're the same but there may be some
place where one theory says one thing and the other says something else some you know and not all
of that's a different situation this is sort of the wrong way right look the theories that Priya
are talking about are different theories how do I know that well they say different things like they
say the exact structure you have all these compactified kalabaya spaces with different topologies that
this guy has this one and that one this is a different theory then you subject it to some
analysis and say wait let me finish then you subject it to an analysis and say what does this
theory predict now there is no logical reason why two different theories couldn't make the same
predictions well it depends what you mean by different they say different things no if they predict
exactly the same things in every series conceivable circumstance they say the same thing except maybe
in different language well this is you know as I say you you say space time has 10 dimensions
three of them spread out seven of them are compactified you're a mathematician I give you
different topologies for that compactification those are two different theories of space time
structure not really aren't sure they are they're not gonna be different things they're not
different topologies what is this is this a limit that no you can't have two theories no I think
no no this is I think what we're alluding to is a very interesting conundrum and limit in cosmology
again restricted to cosmology which is the fact that you we do not have a theory pre-big bang
that we can get observational evidence for so we cannot pin down which theory is right we can't
use the same methods of evaluation of the truth value of theories that we have become accustomed to
and we cannot discriminate between them so what so the so how do we determine what is more valid
than which which model is more valid than the other because the predictions that these theories
make are always late time predictions and they patch on to everything that we do see so you know
we don't have anything that's can be used as a discriminant right so it's a new kind of explanation
so you know this is an idea of a multiverse right for example these are not testable theory so
in cosmology we are at this very interesting juncture where we've reached a point where we may have to
start permitting other kinds of explanations beyond testable observability and so on so forth
and you know maybe he's right that maybe in 10 years someone will come up with an observable
consequence today and in the night sky you know in the cosmic microwave background or something of
two different bubble universes colliding and we will know I mean maybe no yeah I mean I'm just
saying something completely theoretical which may not actually apply that's why we have yeah
I'm saying that if by chance two theories in every case predict exactly the same thing
then I say the theories are equivalent but as it is all these theories that you mentioned
we don't really know what they predict in some we know the things that we they may agree on the
things that we know but it's a very limited range and lots of things that these we haven't
mathematically or whatever we haven't ever to use these theories to predict so they look different
and it may well be different because they at some point you may turn out that they do predict
different things but if you are sure that they will never predict anything different than their
equivalent in my in my interview so let me give you again go back to philosophy
the introduction to skepticism do we know here's here two theories that are different
one theory says this is what Priya will tell us that there was a big kind of big bangy event
that was what 13.7 are we now billion years ago and there was all of this galaxy formation and
then the earth formed in the solar system and there was a lot of evolution then we have another
theory it's really quite a different theory it says this the universe only began to exist 10
minutes ago none of you you none of you actually got here by subway or anything like that
it it just began right by fiat in exactly the state that we think obtained 10 10 minutes ago but
there was nothing before that right so you've got all these false memories it's going to be okay
when you go home everything will be right now those are just different theories right one says
you grew up and the other says no you didn't right you're under this kind of strange delusion of
having grown up but clearly by construction they make exactly the same predictions for everything
you could possibly observe from here until infinity because they they make the the physical state
match as of 10 minutes ago those are different theories now one is silly okay i'm not suggesting
you believe it but your reason for not believing it is not anything you observe it's something else
but i mean it depends what you mean by theory i mean you want a theory
if you say some if you stick on some kind of irrelevant stuff to a theory and then you say
that makes it different and there's nothing to do with with prediction anything else
then then you say okay that's different but actually it's the same thing if it predicts the same thing
but i think his point was i thought your point to me at least not being a mathematician or a
cosmologist or a philosopher made sense that it may be that those two theories in addition to
what they predict which is the same they could also at some point you could also find things
that they predict that are different no sure but the question and therefore if that then they
would be different but if for some that's what you want theoretical so i'm saying but if it was an
unknown theoretical reason you can show that two theories will predict always the same thing then
i claim that they're equivalent in my definition of equivalence may not be your definition you may
you may feel that if you add some irrelevant thing to a theory then it makes it different i say that
if if the theory if the theories are the same for all relevant things then then for me that's the
difference is between the theories happen in a regime where our methods of observation testing
blah blah blah don't apply that's the case we are talking about it's not that they you know one of
them is this ridiculous because it's different the thing is you could have two theories that are
very different theories who set of predictions they make a set of predictions that are identical
and accessible with the apparatus we have the experimental observational parties that we have
they make predictions that might be different let's say they are different they are different
but they are different in a realm in a regime that our methods of evaluating theories are not
applicable not accessible no no no argument with that yeah i think those are the kinds of theories
i was just picking up something that he said mr mr's understanding it that if they are exactly
the same on every conceivable experiment that you can make then i say they're equivalent that's uh
but that's not what you're saying uh i really appreciate it well i think i want to go back to
bringing darthia into the conversation about kinds of explanation that constitute knowledge
uh and so and they are fundamentally different across disciplines and i wanted you to talk a
little bit more about um you know in science it's kind of there is a mechanism of figuring out what
is a valid explanation um what is how does that map into other fields how would you think about it
in other fields you obviously are not ordering there's no hierarchy of explanation there isn't
one you know critical view that is better than the other there's no you don't have a mechanism
or to generate you know a hierarchy of explanation to say this is better than that that's better
than this but there is something else i mean still there is a way in which people are able to ferret
out the absurd from the profound and um and you know it would be interesting to hear a little bit more
about how the discrimination happens in other fields it's kind of easy to see how it happens
in science well i mean what you described in science works very much with a model of um
um figuring out and representing the laws of nature so within i mean in a very abstract way
within a representational paradigm and um i would say you mean beyond mathematics not yeah okay yeah
um with the empirical component and in the humanities i mean which is also historical phenomenon there
were no humanities before the renaissance but in the humanities what you study is not primarily
nature but i would say the best products of the human mind as they i mean arguably best product
mind as they emerge in the arts as they emerge in philosophy in religion and um what we study is
what allows for their emergence but also how we make them relevant to our time and what we produce
is not primarily knowledge but we accept we expect that this engagement with what i would call the
best products of the human mind which is always mediated um transforms the student and the teacher
and the teacher so it's a very different activity so of course there are hundreds of years of
procedures and ways of deciding and evaluating the validity of that kind of scholarship absolutely
but it's not within that frame of a kind of representational factual empirical set i don't know
rotation doesn't play a role at all well the limitation plays also a role but the limitation
there i think has to do primarily with historical situatedness historical cultural situatedness
which is a limitation that you know you can turn around you can make productive and in a way when
i address the situatedness of scientific knowledge i was interested in hearing you talk more and you
did talk quite a bit about making the limitations productive uh rather than seeing them as a disadvantage
and say in the humanities it's i don't think a model of a cumulative
with uh enterprise and i i was listening to the three of you and i found it especially interesting
with some of the remarks that Tim made you also portrayed in a way scientific progress not as a
cumulative enterprise but as a synthetic enterprise or it's both right
well you address the question of the reduction of the increased complexity which then raises
the question of the reduction of complexity yeah i guess the two alternate but so i guess
there the limitations would be articulated differently with regard of to how you see your
entire field and its limitations if you say the scientific versus say the English scholarship
in the humanities i think scholarship in the humanities a very fundamental level always has to do
with different histories and the present and how you bring them together whereas in the sciences i
don't think this is the primary limitation which you can make or have to make productive but you
know you you talked about the observation and the limits to predictability and i would assume
there are others yeah i mean let me just say that i mean the sociological you mentioned before the
sociological aspect in terms of funding and so on i mean that that's a different kind of limit
to be very alive in the sciences and in some sense
what i mean this comes back to the question what are you interested in what are you trying to find
out at a certain point there was a tremendous premium on finding out a whole lot about radioactive
uranium and how it works during the manhattan project and a lot of resources were put into it and by
any reasonable standard of success people were quite successful in figuring out how it worked but
there was obviously a decision to focus resources on that question rather than any number of other
questions you could have focused on and and probably right now for people like uh Priya
um the biggest threat to producing more knowledge my guess is that somebody says why do we care
about dark matter rather than you know that there are limitations of the sizes and so on and
everything and you know i mean that's at least one place where part of us we're just looking at the
limitations the universe itself puts on us in terms of what we can know about it um there are
probably much stronger limitations of the that we put on ourselves as a society in terms of what
we demand or or request or make sure gets funded and is allowed you know research that's allowed to
continue and that's probably a bigger worry quite honestly practical worry than any of these other
ones kind of abstract ones we've been talking about okay questions no comments if you have comments
you want to be drawn to be driven by the applicability right but you know i think that um important point
that you made is that science is invested in a notion of progress in a way that the humanities
are not because there's a provisionality in science okay couple quick uh quick observation
then uh my question um i've got i submit that there one possible reconciliation between um
Joseph and the pre- um temp camp on the uh on the matter of the theories uh as you know um
originally there were multiple versions of string theory uh five of them Ed Witten
rep uh you know famously resolved them in a very short period of time to surprise his fellow conferees
so i'm so you know one possible way out of that conundrum would be that on a deeper level of
mathematical structure they would found to have have more in common but it's also a question of
we can't know what we don't know it's to the point of since we can't there's some tantalizing
possibilities but we can't go back before the big bang so their axiomatics assumptions made
that those different assumptions affect the theories that come out of it and it is remarkable
they predict the same end state so i just want that to answer that um the but the the question is um
um in terms of knowledge production we focused on cognitive production of knowledge um
and mostly in the sciences we didn't really address very much in the arts and the question
my question is based on your Wilson uh biologist no uh that um science explains emotion
um and art communicates it communicates emotions so the question is since our
um cognition is primarily driven or largely driven by emotional and other cognitive biases
of which we are not necessarily aware um and that rational explanation is often an afterthought
i'm wondering if there's anyone who has any comment on that that whole portion of knowledge
that is partially brought to the table by uh phenotypical expression and neural tissue
a lot for example in the ascending visual pathway and the hewlin-weasels discovery
but also uh in terms of interesting experiments that show that a choice experiment uh can be
predicted by the researchers by monitoring the the limbic system with fMRI they know the decision
the subjects will make before they use cognition and language to make that decision if anyone has
a comment on that entire realm of knowledge i would welcome it i i mean i i'm not deeply
knowledgeable about this fMRI things but my understanding from what i've read
is that is that it's a bit overblown when people say oh uh you know we evil scientists looking at
our screens and monitoring your brain know what you're going to do before you do it
in that those are typically choices which are literally random i mean what you think of as
random choices right push the button on the right or the button on the left with no particular reason
to care or be able to consider which is the better choice right and that of course
something's going to happen in your brain that's going to make that as it were decide which way you
go and maybe they can pick it up but but the kind of choices we care about are ones that we
consider right ones that we reflect on and the liberate about and you know that that's not even
what they're looking at so if you were to if you were to if you were to ask me a question about
that required a lot of the liberation where where i thought a lot hung on what i did and it was hard
and i had to evaluate and make guesses and so on i don't think anybody looking at an fMRI is going
to tell me ten minutes beforehand or five minutes beforehand how that's going to come out
the
decision
right but how that decision making is done chemical molecule by molecule by molecule is not known
right so i just want to come back to you Wilson right i think he is overly optimistic so i think
his point of view is that you know the things that are currently unnoble are things that are in the
things in the gaps are between disciplines and he's very optimistic that we will know in x number
of years we will know what is the molecular composition of anger like what will you know what are the
things that need to line up that will make you angry wait wait wait he believes in that
have you finished
and that we are in mind and brain has evolved over the years and that we realize monkeys can't
understand the world why don't why is it obvious that some species will come after us with bigger
brains that we're not the end of evolution and they'll look back at us and say obviously those
species couldn't understand what was going on
but yep there's nothing i can respond other than i think as a species we seem to be so stupid that
we'll destroy the planet before there's room for you know the next set of emerging
i mean let me just say say what i mean people often say that look we evolved to survive on the
savannah that's you know the context now humans as you know unlike every other species that's ever
existed the premium for intelligence in humans became critical that's why our brains got so big
right they got so big they got as big as they could get until it would kill you to give birth
this a thing with such a big brain and that's why we have such a long latency period is infants
that we can't take care of ourselves because basically we're still essentially growing
outside the womb to get our brains even bigger so we're pretty much at the biological brain limit
but the interesting thing is that that pressure for higher intelligence does not occur in any
other species right cockroaches have been around a really long time they don't need to get smarter
they're doing perfectly well they're gonna outlive us okay so there's the whether that whether there
will ever be a more intelligent species is one question the other question is are we really that
dumb i mean the argument that says we grew up and we we were selected to survive in the savannah
would predict that why should we ever understand the microscopics of a table right just the microscopic
just the the chemical structure the double helix structure of dna why should we ever understand
a supernova why should we ever understand how galaxies form i mean all of things that are vastly
outside the scale or a lot of mathematics right why should we understand complex numbers
you know so the range of things that humans have been able to understand that have no basis
obvious basis at all in evolutionary history is really quite astonishing yeah but there are
other things like understanding beginnings and ends that sort of built into our basic we can't
we can't conceive of things without beginnings around what comes before the beginning comes
after the end there are certain concepts like that seem to me i don't think we're ever gonna
just tell me um yeah i would like to comment on something uh dim said um yeah it's uh well i
agree with everything there's one thing is that we have had this tremendous evolution in
in being able to understand more and more is taking place maybe in the past 50,000 years
before that things were going well slowly so it's a very speculative thing if there's a
if there were similar conditions as we had experience and similar humans exist somewhere else
but if they had a one million year advantage over us what sort of things there i mean if
their the rate of development shoots up at the same rate as ours and continues they may be so
far ahead of us that we look pretty it's pretty primitive well i'm in the arts i'm a painter
and art historian and so i'm going to speak up a little for the other side um what interests me
in the in the arts is there is a difference in science between knowing and in the arts between
creating and the conceptual creating gherson by the way speaks very well about a fluid universe
where one thing happens after another and you have no idea what's going to happen because
each thing accumulates after another thing and in the process of creating whether it's in writing
or in painting it's a process the exciting process is you do not know what is going to happen after
you make one stroke and another stroke what the nature of that procedure is going to be
and that doesn't just limit itself though i think to the world of the art i think it limits itself
i mean it expands itself to the freedom and elasticity of the mind and artists are very often
interested in the interior and exterior world but maybe even more so now in the interior world
what do we know before we look at the world what's already inside us do we already understand
structures without without looking at the external world so there's a conflict between what do we
know internally in our very brain structure what exists in the outside world how do we mingle the
two and how can we the great excitement in the arts is creativity is the unknowing and finding
out where you are finding a position where you are so instead of looking for certainty there's a search
for where will i go will i will it lead somewhere i've never been before and i think these are very
important questions maybe in the larger sphere too about the excitement of unknowability rather than
certainty very nice um very nice i just wanted to quickly add that you know even in science that is
you know there is provisionality it's a different kind of provisionality where you you know what
you know now that is subject you know a current best understanding of something could change
dramatically the means by which it changes is very prescribed its experiment its evidence
and it's different for the arts it's provision the way in which the provisionality shifts is
different and it's part of a what you call the creative process right and i should leave you
to comment more this is beautifully said here doesn't need any help okay first the observation
and then the question the observation is this gentleman third challenge the butterfly effect
is that a true aspect of chaotic systems and in any think of something recent discovery of
a holographic universe that this 3d the information contained in the 3d universe
which we think is 3d can actually be mapped into two dimensions so physical phenomena may be
slightly more ordered than we think i don't know if that's relevant but that's an observation that
maybe you're on to something there uh and then the question is about a world of policy and
decision-making that we make as individuals and we make as a society before the economic collapse
of 2008 uh no one quite saw that coming was that a lack of knowledge was that a butterfly effect or
was that truly we were blind to something that we should have known and it affects today i mean
what's our policy with respect to ISIS and Ebola and all these other threats how real is the
ISIS threat how committed are our allies and enemies how do we know these things so is that
part of this discussion or are we just concerned about art and science as far as knowledge goes
i think what you address is a very interesting question in terms of how far does the scientific
paradigm of knowledge get expanded uh when we go into the realm of politics is uh i don't know
whether i can say the slout here but is economics a science yeah oh that's another one for you
you're concerned love yeah no but when does it and how does it pose as a science and when is it a
form of politics and so i think that's that's the question about the limits of the scientific
paradigm which is i think a very relevant political question that brings up again the question of
about the interests the way relevance gets articulated and debated in a democratic society
if the resources are limited right i mean i would say in the in the particular case of the financial
crisis uh it's not so much the limitations of economics as a science it's just the imposition
of unbelievable amounts of self-interest into the system i mean you know ponzi schemes
it's economically well understood that ponzi schemes will collapse it's also perfectly well
understood that they make a heck of a lot of money for certain people over a certain period of time
okay so a self-organizing ponzi scheme in which a bank can sell somebody a mortgage and then
immediately throw it off on some other bank so that if the thing goes bust there that you know
that they're secure i mean this is just an opportunity for people to make tons and tons and tons of
money in a way that is forcibly not sustainable and will eventually yes is it for sea
or sea or was in 2006 people before sea some people i think yes i think it was perfectly for
sea or sea and for scene and still people were making tons and tons of money off it i mean
you know the question is not g could you not see it coming the point is even if you see it coming
lots of people are going to say yeah and somebody else is going to get stuck with the bag and i'm
going to make a ton of money off it okay and you you can't know no amount of economic you know
economics will tell you that's actually what's going to happen i was just add that the in fact
that people were after the money were right and in the end when everything collapsed they didn't
lose the money the the banks were bailed out they got every and everything went uh so from their
point of view if they're interested in making the money they were completely right and economics
was a very sound science given the fact for they understood it and they wanted to get their money
and they didn't care about anything else so um so they work very well and it shows that it is a
viable science i just wanted to sorry would you want to say something well i i keep that for
another point the um i wanted to quickly respond to your question about you know the relevance
for argument to threats and risk and managing risk isis ebola and so on and i think there is
relevance because you know what we're talking about um is extrapolation from what we know however
little it might be and what those extrapolations are and the degree of confidence we have in those
extrapolations so you know there are models that predict now how ebola will spread with a certain
degree of confidence for example so indeed the ways in which we are thinking about this that has
to do with extrapolations of current knowledge and the limitations that it imposes in terms of how
reliable those extrapolations are is very relevant and it's very policy relevant
but i think you know my former advisor is now started in with a bunch of people in Cambridge
and institute for the evaluation of existential risks it's um martin reese um so you know they
really work within you know trying to estimate the probabilities for it right i mean i i do think
the tactical situation their cases like you say so take ebola could it become airborne if it became
airborne you're in an entirely different epidemiological situation very dangerous extremely dangerous
their limits to what we know and what the mutation rates are and what the probabilities are but
on the other hand if like climate change it's not that we're in that situation we're in a situation
we have tremendously good i mean there's you know always issues around the edge um there are
systematic attempts by people with a lot of money and a lot of power to avoid doing certain things
because it'll hurt their bottom line in the case of isis i mean my god one of the suggestions
what's the first thing we have to do about isis secure the border with mexico
i mean this is not you know you shouldn't be having a discussion about the limits of
knowledge here you should i mean this is just you know fear-mongering nonsense right that a bunch
of guys with you know rifles are going to be coming across the mexican border i mean i just want to
give up not for a new film that's coming out called merchants of doubt and it's about this
historian at carver Naomi or sicky uh talk about climate change and she's done a study showing that
more than 97 percent of scientists actually agree on climate change and we know how in popular
culture it's presented as an ongoing controversy right so okay this question is directed towards
the scientists possibly the class of scientists a little louder can you hear me yeah yeah i made
the difference uh so uh earlier dr natar natarajan pointed out that there seems to be an agreed-upon
limit uh pretty big bang uh my question is given that you're all curious um empirical reasoning
often atheistic people i'm talking about scientists uh how do you deal with just that
stoppage that that just oh let's forget about it let's just not talk about it and maybe you have
some insight on personally or with your colleagues you can talk about someone else
well it is problematic right and i think that so for example let me give uh an example of um
because pretty big we don't have information and we have these theoretical ideas floating around
and then post big bang we have this additional conundrum that you know there's
depending on who you are there about six numbers that will describe the fate of the universe the
future present on the past and they are measurable and they have particular values the question is
why do they have those values and so this is whole sort of there was a whole argument of why does our
universe seem to be so tailor-made why it's so finely tuned right and so one way out of this
finely tuned situation was to say well let's say there are six numbers that determine the fate
of the universe and let's just say that there's some probability distribution function for
what values all possible values of those six numbers there are many draws from those the numbers
six six draws infinite number of six draws and each of them gives you a universe so to someone
like me that's a very acceptable so that's a multiverse so that's a very comfortable explanation
and an explanation um which is not going to be empirically testable and as i said and the
discomfort there is do we then have to start thinking about new ways of evaluating excellent
competing explanations right and i think it's something that's scientifically quite actively
debated wouldn't you say to them on both on philosophical grounds and empirical grounds
in terms of like and is this what's the out right i mean that's what you're asking like what's the
out right you know yeah i mean the only thing i would add is there's a kind of presupposition
behind your question i don't know what atheism has to do with anything that well what can we do
if we want to know something but the evidence isn't available to answer the question we're
interested in how do we deal with that and of course that happens all the time in life and
lots of things i mean there are people who debate who wrote Shakespeare's plays and they have these
different you know possible people will there ever be evidence i mean there's been all this dispute
who was Jack the Ripper i just was reading recently they think oh gosh there was a piece of evidence
that was overlooked some shawl and it had this DNA on it now we know it was so and so maybe that's
right maybe that's wrong maybe that shawl would never show up i mean there are lots of questions
out there that you might have intense interest in if it turns out the evidence isn't there to
to answer the question you're interested in you know look at your disappointment okay suck it up
that's life i mean you know you do your best right you try and look you try and look at all the
possible avenues for acquiring evidence and if you run into a roadblock and it could be a roadblock
of deep physical principle or it could be a very trivial one right that just that shawl got burned
up and it's gone um if you run into a roadblock you run into a roadblock and you just
get on with life i don't know because i don't think there's anything right to say about that
in the beginning you said that you didn't have a reason to believe that the human mind is limitless
and that got me thinking um do we have reasons to believe that our mind are rational so my question
kind of flows out of that like a foundational question what is the philosophical foundation
for one human beings humans being able to understand the universe mathematically
and then two the universe in actuality being mathematically intelligible it's kind of like the
evolution question before zero foundation for us trusting our rationality and then
how is it that the universe is intelligible i think that is what is truly amazing
that a that mathematics is such a potent and fundamental language that enables you
or a system of thinking that enables you to understand so much of the universe and why it's
intelligible at all i think is um i i think it's that's a wonderful mystery it's a source of
wonder and awe and i i don't think that we have a deep understanding at the moment
one of my colleagues does have a book that he wrote max techmark um recently um and he attempts
um he makes a claim that mathematics is much more fundamental in a way to it underlies everything
in the universe and that's why everything in his opinion is intelligible with mathematics i'm not
sure i'd go as far as him but that's one place to see what what do you think what does the mathematician
think well i think i think somehow that mathematics is the right way of understanding a lot of things
that happen in the world and it's you know just like uh just like if you try to use ordinary
language to explain things uh things will be things in ordinary life are not so uh don't don't have
connections uh which can be expressed so so well in ordinary language so if you try to
uh for example describe some fairly simple things in in some subject like differential geometry
which comes in and in string theory and so on if you try to describe that in language it becomes
so convoluted that you can't even even start so i think mathematics uh is the sort of the natural
way to try and think about a lot of phenomena why i don't know i mean it's a mystery but but it
seems to be um i mean what how do people how do people communicate how do people uh write down facts
of things the facts so so what we know is we know how to uh writing started by writing down
by uh speech first and then you try to reproduce speech and the language and so on and um
uh mathematics uh is uh is that process which where you are trying to describe certain phenomena
and these phenomena are even even in things that may not consider science like economics uh it
becomes uh very hard to express certain concepts without using uh mathematical and mathematical
yeah can i just make a short comment here because i think um the Greeks divided mathematics we
talk about mathematics the Greeks divided mathematics into geometry and arithmetic arithmetic was the
theory of number and geometry was the theory of magnitude um over the course of time in mathematical
physics the number part the algebraic part has gotten bigger and bigger and bigger and in a way
the geometrical part kind of smaller and smaller and smaller and more and more and more and more
it's contested okay but but certainly most of most of physics books you're going to have a lot of
algebra in it okay and you're using complex numbers and people ask why complex numbers and things
like that but if you were to ask why is geometry if you go back to you clinton geometry why might
that be a good way to represent the world the answer was because it's has a geometrical structure
it just straightforwardly has a geometrical structure Galileo said you know the the language of geometry
with circles and triangles and so on because he thought there were such things i'm not an expert
on greek but i have a feeling the geometry meant something else and what you mean by geometry
i think it included algebra what they were doing no it didn't it that's part of arithmetic that's
okay kamakas i do know okay what do you think eucalyt elements is what geometry it's geometry
it's geometry with with one book on the theory of proportion which was held in common between
arithmetic and geometry sorry this is getting technical um so anyway if you think this way you
might say i'm all of this is a plug okay that's coming up if you think this way you might say what
i'd really like to do is get numbers out of my mathematics and and they mentioned my book new
new foundations for physical geometry that's just what that is it's an attempt to get numbers out and
then you understand more clearly by the mathematics of the physical world i i i think that uh in my
my estimation these divisions uh that exist you know there's a geometry and algebra and analysis
and so on those are topology i don't know what uh those are artificial divisions in in my view and
i think that all these things are very much intertwined i don't think you know for example i don't think
you can separate number theory from analysis or from geometry of geometry or for differential
geometry and one flows right into into each other and uh you know i i see that happening all over i
mean and uh you know people who are really mathematical minded like like witten is just as
interested in in number theory is in geometry is in as an analysis and it all sort of flows together
and in fact uh some of the some of the great discoveries that come out of string theory were
discus mathematics which were not i i don't know i have not
so completely convinced about or don't understand what what the discoveries are in physics but
the ones in mathematics are spectacular and they were discoveries in number theory
discoveries in geometry and it was all intertwined and it was all intertwined with analysis and
and the uh whole development of complex numbers comes from geometry or you could say in many
developments in geometry from complex numbers and etc etc i don't think you can you can uh
artificially say this is numbers this is just and it just doesn't work that way in my in my
estimation okay so i have two questions one for Priya what do you think about the um
believability of the recent evidence on gravitational waves
according to multiverse theory and um not secure enough to be considered even a detection
so there was a claim that gravitational waves the detection of
gravitational waves would support the multiverse theory not talking about the detection of gravitational
waves supporting inflation theory which is correct and what is disputing the
set measurements was disputed is how significant that result is and that will get settled
in a couple of months when many other experiments will be able independent experiments
should see or not see it because that's an issue of uh the model as well as how it's tested to
both of those yeah no i think the there isn't uh enough scientific consensus on what the
potential observational signatures might be of the multiverse
my second question is to all of you regarding the politics of the peer review process in
production of knowledge
the politics of it politics of purely well i'll just make a real quick
it's interesting because i work in different fields in philosophy everything's double blind
in everything's double blinded yeah it's incredible right so you don't know as a referee you don't
know who wrote the paper uh it's curious because in physics it isn't yeah because people have to
refer to their own work i guess so often it's not really practical but there you know you you can
try and limit uh peer review i mean bias is coming into a peer review through certain
mechanisms like blinding and uh you know it is done and it has made some difference
so whenever it is an explosive idea that it it is lot much harder and people who are
you know already in the field will resist it yeah to become a part of the existing body of knowledge
so that's a great it's a that's a great aspect of it and i think that's um it's a very
pertinent question because you know it some of it has to do with the practice of science and how
science is now being practiced it's no longer the sort of lone individual green thinking great
brilliant thoughts and writing these papers right it's a group enterprise and then there's a turf
there's a definition of turf now because there are groups and because it's funding it's all the
things are it's the situatedness of how it is created which is very very important and the way
that impacts in my opinion it's not good for science to all become big group science big
science as it's called and i think we need different models of doing science that need to work at
the same time and i totally agree that one of the one of the sort of casualties of big science is
that it's science by consensus so there's not as many creative risks taken and therefore if someone
takes a creative risk it's harder um to actually make an impact
my question is directed at dorothea earlier you seemed a bit saddened at um when prion was
talking about scientific knowledge and and it made it seem as if that was the only knowledge
we cared about and you you you implied that there's other knowledge other types of knowledge which
are important to you understanding that there's more to just the humanities than just knowledge
what other types of knowledge are relevant to you I linguistic knowledge like what does it mean
to understand a sentence came to mind but but is that the sort of thing you're talking about um
i think i should clarify something i wasn't saddened
and
i i have no science envy
and uh nor science suspicion or problems with science um that's why i try to
let's not disclaimer yeah that's why i try to delineate how i understand that's the sciences
um do something very different from what people like i do in the humanities say i articulated it by
divisions uh sciences social sciences humanities and um what what you picked up as maybe a frown on
my side was not against science or against prayer but uh more a doubt and the direction in which i
kind of at some times try to steer our discussion was when the scientific model of
knowledge production and also authority becomes the dominant one in political discussions that's
not the fault of scientists but when um what i would think need to be deliberated in terms of
procedures values etc get articulated as if it were an issue of more or less clear scientific
facts that i think is uh the problematic area and that's where i would criticize um it's not the
fault of the scientists but the uses of an often rather reductive model of scientific knowledge
in the public domain as the exclusive model of knowledge thank you that question
it's kind of related and um along how to control that then what you just expanded on
the misuse of uh science or social science and also the uh the other part i was trying to get it to
was expanding more on uh what kind of schemes you can place in there so you can differentiate the
hierarchy of explanations well i mean then i guess the question is in what domain i i found
it important but pre-asset the issue say if we look at just research institutions already
there the question of um individual structures and how much do you have actually
the huge conglomerates of collective research and individual institutions dictate priorities
define relevance that i think can have a very negative impact on science but also on
other areas of learning and inquiry um yeah i think if i may comment briefly on um you're talking
about sort of the policy makers adaptation of and um of science i think part of the problem i think
arises it's my personal opinion i mean arises from the fact of a misperception of what science is
in the public domain i mean and i think scientists are partly to blame for this uh but not entirely
there's this notion that science offers this sort of way to derive fixed truths from nature
it says machine you're you're churning out these fixed truths um and i think that is not in the
service of uh public good and in good policies etc etc mainly because that is not what science
is science is messy the process is messy and that are the way our understanding proceeds is you know
there it's provisional but it's supported by data and evidence and yet it's provisional so when
there's more data better data more accurate data possibly helped along by new technologies etc etc
new instruments you know um there is i mean there is a shift in the best current understanding
so science is very dynamic there's a way it's proven dynamic it has uncertainty somehow
that needs to be understood by the public better because otherwise policy makers are taking a very
simplified view of science which has an incorrect view of science and co-opting it
um for other reasons for you know that the extraneous reasons that have nothing to do with science
itself but but have to do with the reality of politics and interest self-interest and and so on
so forth so i think part of the where the solution lies in sort of mitigating these sort of policy
difficulties is really i think it behooves us scientists to kind of explain better
how science actually works the practice of science and between the social science and physical
science is a what kind of scheme can you make the social science in more robust
well i think that um you know we can get into a whole debate and i've gotten a lot of debates
with my economist friends and sociology friends about um how evidence could be used to make
arguments in their fields and and i think that there are limitations because of the kinds of
complexity in the systems that they study i.e human beings and the fact that we are not rational
actors i mean a behavioral economics is cottling onto it finally and so i think that you know a lot
of areas of social science you know there will be a shift where there'll be kinds of certain kinds
of questions would fall within the purview of the methods of science and they would be useful
but they wouldn't be ultimately useful necessarily they may not be fully illuminating and the kinds
of things as Dorothea talked about which is you know the situation the context um politics self-interest
all of that is much more important can be much more important and many of those questions so
okay
you know why because there's a whole thing at the park
we got a look at that
does
I can do it.
Yo?
That thing can give me money.
Grind the amplifier was a charges.
They can still be interested.
It's not his hurt to him.
What?
He'd give us kinda schmmm wandless
Hey, see, this guy can hold,
Oh op
Is that Hold?
I'm not going to say that.
Mostly data is fine.
You know, research.
You know, trying to get very consistent again
to very specific questions.
You know, the living conditions.
How do you make a decision?
How do you know that's important?
How do you know the decision?
Obviously, I don't know what it's like in the rainforest,
but I don't know what it's like to know what it's like to know.
I hear a lot of them.
What do you think through our movement?
I still don't know what's fine.
The whole country has to bring it to open.
I know it's fine.
I know it's fine.
I know it's fine.
