What was your work before you entered our recovery?
Okay, we're going to get started.
Welcome everybody.
I'm Rob Penzer.
I'm the associate director of the Helix Center.
Before I introduce today's participants, I'd like to give you some
heads up on upcoming events here.
Next month, February 11th, we'll be talking about pain with
Apgar, Opcarian, Ina Belfer, Anis Dijdaveric, and Rebecca
Seal, and Maureen Stratford.
Then on February 25th, we have a program on the displaced
and the other.
Later this year, in March, we'll be talking about music and
healing.
In April, we have two programs, one on nanotechnology and one on
design and nature.
Then in May, our final program for the season will be on
mathematics and the National Institute of Mental Health.
For further details, visit us at our website, helixcenter.org
on Facebook and Twitter.
If you're not on our email list, please sign up on our website
for timely announcements.
Now today's program, the Library is Reality and Metaphor.
To my right is Anthony Grafton, the Henry Putnam University
Professor of History at Princeton University.
To his right, Carol Mandel, Dean of the NYU Division of
Libraries.
To her right, Alberto Mangoyle, writer, translator, editor,
critic, and director of the National Library of Argentina.
Next to him is Daniel Goroff, Vice President and Program
Director at the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
And next to him is Ken Sonar, Arthur K. Watson, Chief Librarian
at the Thomas J. Watson Library of the Metropolitan Museum of
Art.
So I've asked our participants to just start wherever you think
you'd like to.
Well, I'm happy to start as a practitioner.
And one aspect of this exercise that I've found striking
particularly is how unsettling it has been.
Thinking about the wide variety of metaphors for libraries, not
to mention librarians, which inevitably I can't help but
take personally.
And the fact that it's such a multi-valent, evanescent,
complex variety of metaphors that are used for libraries that
are invoked for libraries, it even calls a static just to talk
about that.
I think my point is electronically made.
But all kidding aside, perhaps in the situation we find ourselves
in or I find myself in, we're looking for somewhat more
fixed points.
But even putting that aside, the complexity involved in
considering the multi-valent nature of libraries metaphor has
been a little bit more unsettling than liberating in terms of
imaginative thinking goes.
I guess I know the topic is libraries metaphor, but the other
powerful aspect to me is library is icon in the iconography of
libraries, which is closely related.
And for me, it's just been a privilege to live at the turn
of the century because we've been forced to get at the heart of
the meaning of library in order to make the transformation.
And that's been so exciting.
And what's been amazing to me is that while a lot of the
literary work about libraries metaphor actually conflates
library and book, the public image of library is much more
generous and broader, which is why public libraries are jam-packed
with people engaging in different ways, why thousands and
thousands and thousands of students are in my library every
day, even though circulation of books is tanking quite a bit.
And so I think that there's something very powerful about
connecting to knowledge and connecting to community and
intellectual connection that's quite deep in what people think
about with libraries.
When you said making the transformation, can you say more
about which transformation?
Well, I guess it's the fact that the book has been the
predominant knowledge container for so long that many people
have the image of libraries as containers of books because
books are where the knowledge is and then you come to use the
book and that's, but now that we see how many containers of
knowledge there are, and it's almost opened up older forms
as well.
People are more generous in their ideas about the knowledge
and images and the knowledge and the proprietary and the
knowledge and archives and the knowledge on the Internet and
that suddenly expecting it all to come together, giving
libraries a much bigger preservation and connection role.
Did that make sense?
Did that answer your question?
Yes.
I think that the idea of libraries, I can,
libraries, metaphors, is all contained in an essential
definition of library of which I think the symbol is
Alexandria, of which we know so little.
But in the universal imagination, Alexandria contains all the
libraries to come and every society picks the image of the
library that better suits either its real identity or its
imaginary identity.
And so in our century, we like to think that the library has
been transformed into this generous place which, as you
said, realizes that information is contained in so many
containers.
But that was true in Alexandria where there were no only,
not only scrows, but tablets and maps and drawings and
objects and all these things that contain our memory.
If I can be personal for a moment, I suddenly found myself
less than a year ago at the head of a national library.
And I thought I had an idea of what the library was and what
a national library was and how a national library should
reflect the identity of its society in full.
However, I hadn't paid much attention to the particular
situation of this country, of Argentina.
To be the head of, say, the Library of Congress, which is
the equivalent of the national library of the states,
Carla Hayden has a wonderful, I think, very powerful vision
of what the library could be.
But she has an idea of the situation in which she finds
herself.
And I won't define it for you.
You know it well enough.
But in Argentina, it is a very different situation.
It's a political situation that is not interested in culture.
So you have the library, the national library, as an
important symbol of the identity of a society that doesn't care
about the library.
It still cares about the symbol but doesn't care about the
library.
Let me give you an example and then I'll let you talk.
The other day I met Richard Ovenenden, the head of the
board, and he was telling me in passing that they got a
grant of 25 million pounds.
Our annual acquisition budget is $50,000.
That tells you a lot about the importance of the library as an
intellectual place in Argentina.
The library has been entirely detached in a metaphorical sense.
Yes.
The metaphor has taken off in the practical application.
Nothing entirely because the idea stands that the library is
important as a symbol.
But when you ask a politician to put their money where their
money is then they turn their heads and talk about something
else.
Essentially I think that if we look at the positive side, it
shows how flexible the image of a library can be in so many
different contexts.
I would love to have a discussion around how the way in
which we look at the library defines us rather than we
defining the library.
I think that's an interesting place to take the discussion.
One way in which we used to define ourselves is we were all
library people in the 60s and 70s which might have been the
height of the old technology.
The library was the Willie Sutton principle.
Knowledge was in the books.
You went to get winchles guide to reference books which got
you to bibliographies and it was all very kind of 19th century
and stable.
It had certain advantages which the current economy of
knowledge really lacks.
Not only were students in the library but professors were in
the library.
The academic work was modeled by professors for students who
were at the next desk in a way which is almost inconceivably
rare now.
There are ways in which we need to think about whether that old
image had its values that now need to be resurrected in different
forms for a different way of housing and spreading knowledge.
You can't bring back the library of the 60s.
Bringing back a model where people of different ages work
together would have a lot to be said for it.
I think trying to identify those missing pieces is really
helpful because so much of what we do is new models of what we
need.
That certainly is one example that has to happen in different ways.
It has to happen in the nature of instruction, the kinds of
things that are given and the way those are discussed, bringing
research into the curriculum and then working through it.
It doesn't happen by the side by side.
Although sometimes it does too because the research is such a
different activity and research team.
We try to provide spaces where research teams can work in
that way.
We go into classrooms and bring that together.
It's helpful actually to hear people talk about, well, even so,
here are some of the things that are missing because we do have
to try to get at those.
One of my colleagues at NYU, a historian at NYU, brings
her students, makes them come into the library just to smell
the books.
It's a connection.
We've lost forms of knowledge that she feels that you need to do.
The data, as you say, is the lost connection because they are
there, the books and the virtual library and the objects.
It's a question of reminding ourselves that they are there.
The National Library of Copenhagen is a beautiful building
that's divided into the lower part is computers and students
and readers and professors use that virtual library.
The second part is called the dead books because they are all
the books up to the mid-20th century and most of them haven't
been catalogued so they can't be used.
They're called dead books.
So the readers work under the shadow of these ghosts that are
not conjured up.
They are there to be conjured but the librarians don't make
the effort under the misapprehension which is a very
common misapprehension today that the Internet has everything
and the virtual library has everything.
And of course it doesn't.
We all know that.
And I think that Grafton is right in the sense that we have to
reclaim the virtues of a library that was used at a certain
time and perhaps at other times.
And that doesn't mean leaving aside the new technology on the
country.
It's joining everything together.
We don't have to be monogamous in the library.
Your comment about the person who brought people to smell the
books, I mean, all faction is so strongly tied to memory.
And what about the idea of the engagement of the senses that
a library provides that someone sitting at their computer
terminal accessing the Internet doesn't quite bring about
all the experience and the sensory modalities that are
engaged have a role to play in what the meaning of the
library experiences.
There's some interesting disagreement about that.
On the one hand, I mean, such research as I've read
suggests that you don't read on screen the way you read on
paper and that what you read on screen doesn't stick to your
long-term memory in the same way.
You're actually using a different bit of your brain.
And that's why it doesn't stick, seem to stick in the same way.
You're using the bit of your brain that does computation rather
than the bit that you use for an elaborating.
That's at least what they find when they see what lights up.
On the other hand, I have friends among the science graduate
students at Princeton who are obviously star young
scientists and a couple of them come from my Alma mater,
the University of Chicago.
So they're also great readers.
And they have told me quite insistently that they don't
buy this for a moment, that they never read anything except on
a screen and their command of what they read, which is highly
technical and demanding, is extremely tight and precise.
And they've given me some demonstration.
So their view is their minds have been rewired to work in a
way that fits contemporary media.
Speaking to researchers at the University of London,
Ontario, who are mapping the brain, they told me that
physiologically the reading on a printed page and the reading
on screen functions differently because the eye doesn't read
continuously, but in jumping movements called saccade.
So on a printed page, it always lands on something that's
there, while on the screen it can land at a moment where the
screen flickers and unconsciously we see an app that
we see an absence.
So it's a different form of reading.
But that the brain becomes rewired.
The brain can do extraordinary things when one door closes,
the brain opens a window.
And for instance, my son does everything on his little gadget,
send letters, listen to music, watch films, make coffee,
I'm not sure.
But yes, and everything happens in a way that for me is
impossible and too old.
My son being trained as a pilot was able to read Moby Dick and
a palm instrument in all of the waste time between possible
sessions.
But as to this physicality, I was thinking about your question
about what the library says about us.
And it made me think of our rootlessness and our even
homelessness sometimes.
And then I was thinking about the thousands of students that
turn up in the library on college campuses.
And having been involved peripherally in the design of several
libraries recently on college campuses, I've come to find
that they're not used the same way that they were in the past.
And I've heard story after story of students, especially during
exam periods when the library might be open even 24 hours, who
turn up in the afternoon with a bag.
And they pick out a comfortable chair and a corner and they
set themselves there and take out their drinks and their
supplies and so on.
And study the way we always studied for a few hours.
And at some point they disappear and come back in their
pajamas and spend the night.
Either studying some of the time, sleeping some of the time,
but staking out that home in a way in the library has become
part of the culture, perhaps because they have no place else
to go.
It's amazing to me.
I've been astonished at, and I think it is the power of what
library means as a place to work.
And as we were going through our turn of the century transition
and planning our renovations, and we did a lot of study of who
was the library for.
We interviewed just hundreds of people and distinguished
faculty and they all said physically, physically, the
library is for students, not resource wise, but physically.
We have library for students, we are in our office, we can get
everything electronically, make sure you page stuff so people
can get it to me.
I'm not leaving my office, I have everything set up.
But the students, what we have actually specialized in, and
this goes back to your question, I don't know whether it's smell
or companionship or what it is, it's definitely electric
outlets, but they are definitely, you find them, you know.
Just like in airports, wherever the outlet is, the person is,
and no matter how uncomfortable the spot.
But we actually realized that one of our services was space as a
service, and that one of the things we had to design was space
for intellectual productivity.
And we actually have principles, we devised, we've, you know,
observed and we've changed things, and we've got sizes of work
stations and distances from people and all kinds of things and
different configurations, because you don't want just want, and
actually one of the things that we've done is promulgate this
across campus, because there's no room in the library for everybody
who wants to be in the library.
Just try coming in, you're walking over bodies, and you know,
and this is the library where the circulation, as I said, and so
what are they doing there, why are they there?
And, but as we design new campus buildings or convert spaces
in certain areas, they're trying to create some of the same kind
of spaces for inspiration, spaces for intellectual productivity.
Whether that really will work, or whether it has to have the name
library on it, that remains to be seen.
I think this is a very positive trend, and increase in gate
out is perhaps almost always a good idea, but I think it's
to a point, but I think it's also symptomatic of the change in
metaphor, and the fact that the metaphor has been desacralized,
and it's no longer the common, almost cliche metaphor of library
as temple, as holy place, with its appropriate architecture,
with the point that Professor Grafton was making a minute ago,
with the professor, priest, and the student,
the acolyte, and all the metaphors line up perfectly.
Now we've shifted to a desacralized situation where the most
appropriate metaphor, perhaps, and not in all in a disparaging
or negative term, is library as office space.
And that's a shift in metaphor.
I would say there's, I would argue a little bit to qualify that,
but there is a way in which the library is a particular form
of temple. It's the temple of Iskulepius where you went to
incubate to spend the night in the hope that something would appear
to you, ideally Iskulepius himself, who would say your throat
hurts gargle, as he actually did.
And I think that that is also what they're doing, and I think to that extent,
the books retain some kind of air of sacrality, and you
spend the night there because the books are there, even if you're not
consulting them.
And I think picking up on your metaphor of the office and the idea
that the space still remains in some sense sacred,
I would say that while now one certain use of a library
is coming to the surface, the workspace, not necessarily
the taking of books and reading books, part of the mission of the library,
perhaps has to be bringing the faithful to the temple,
as to say, educating new readers.
One of the huge challenges the National Library has is
procuring more readers. We have, I'm afraid to say too many readers,
because we have had to extend the reading hours to midnight.
It's always full, but as you have pointed out, the borrowing of books
declines in number. So how do we make that those who come to the library
borrow books, and how do we create new readers in the outside world,
people who are not readers? My son again, I'm sorry to quote him,
so many times. When he was about 14, he was a great video game player.
And I've never played a video game in my life.
So he asked me to accompany him once to a video game arcade.
So I said, well, sure, do we buy a ticket to go in?
He said, no, we can go in and, and all these machines,
well, do we, do we queue? Do we get a token to play the game?
Do we put our name? I realized I didn't know the ritual of the place.
And most people have never been in a library, and certainly don't know
the ritual of the place. How to bring people to the library to read
is the big question. Of course, I don't have an answer.
I'll be glad for any advice you can give me.
Even getting the elite students at a great university or users of some place
like the Met who are pretty much all very highly trained to use books when they
should is non-trivial. Cambridge has a routine in the history
faculty for MA students. They're given on Friday what are called research challenges.
And they're problems that cannot be solved with any resources on the Internet.
The only way you can solve them is by going to every library in Cambridge.
And it strikes me that, you know, even at the elite level, most of us aren't doing that,
and most of our students aren't, in fact, getting that kind of training.
But when you go to the vast, hungry public, that's a huge problem as well.
We are going to start a program next year, and I will let you know in a couple of years if it works.
A teacher came to me with a suggestion.
She had been a teacher for 30 years and realized that the children coming out of school
couldn't read or didn't want to read.
And very few had reading passion had become readers.
And she realized also that it was less the fault of the students' intelligence certainly,
or having books at that disposal or coming from homes that didn't have books.
Rather, the problem was that the teachers weren't readers.
And so they were asked to teach reading when they didn't care about reading.
They weren't passionate about reading.
And she created a program to teach teachers how to become readers.
And she's doing this in a small area of the province of Buenos Aires, and it's working marvelously.
So I'm going to try that the National Library extend the program to the country.
And I hope we will be able to bring some more readers to the library that way.
But I'll tell you in a couple of years if it works.
I guess we don't see our mission as creating readers.
We see our mission as creating knowledge seekers and helping them seek knowledge in whatever way they need to.
I mean, our clientele are engineers and scientists and artists.
And reading is wonderful, but reading is not everything.
I would use sacrilege words.
I can't believe I said that.
But also, we do see a difference in international students from American students in terms of being acclimated to libraries.
You know, there is a wonderful history of public libraries in towns across the United States and children being read to and going to libraries.
Of course, there are many.
We wish there were more.
And we find a difference in the comfort levels that American students come into the library with.
Still, they need to be taught research.
They need to be taught that the Internet isn't everything.
But there's a level of comfort in the nature of books, libraries, information that sometimes even at the graduate student level, we have to acclimate students too.
You're separating the seeking of knowledge from reading.
No, I'm just saying the bra.
I'm not saying one is a kind of broader umbrella.
And that I see reading as a subset of that.
And how so?
Because when you say reading, I assume you mean reading a whole book.
If you don't mean that, then I don't mean that.
So I'm not worried because those people seek knowledge and reading the briefer sense all over the place.
Well, exactly.
And reading has always been that.
You never, in few cases, only concentrate on books.
You become a castle-born.
But in that case, yes.
But most people have a vaster area of exploration, which includes, of course, books.
But then the books serve to find a guide in your life experience.
And you get knowledge from other sources that you read as well.
We read the world.
We read the gestures of people.
We read in a much larger sense.
So I take objection about this division between seeking knowledge and reading.
Even in oral societies, there is a form of reading without which the society cannot survive because it cannot communicate.
I want to come to the defense of this group that we disparaged a little who used the internet and feel that everything is there.
And all of the world's information is there because all we're doing is applying the same metaphor that a previous generation applied from the started when you wish.
And Alex Andrey started with Bibliotheque and Universales started with the ideals of what a Harvard Library should be, et cetera, what the New York Public Library should be.
So it's the same metaphor that's applied to a different format.
Misguided then and misguided now.
But there's a consistency in the metaphor which I find fascinating because there's an impulse to want it all there to have your Bibliotheque and Universales in between boards, that your keyboard, enwitener, just as long as someplace.
The Library of Babel which is completely useless because it contains everything. So it contains text that cannot be read.
It contains misinformation. It contains, for instance, the true catalog of the library and millions and millions of false catalogues.
So it's completely useless. But in spite of that, I think we have an impulse to face the chaos, the absurdity, the meaningless of the universe with a hope that this institution can lend it order, can give us a map for this thing that is mapless.
And I think that metaphor can be very useful.
The difficulty with this, I mean, I'm very sympathetic to this notion. It goes back to Erasmus saying that old dysmonetius is building a library without walls.
Yes.
And that's perhaps the closest thing to what the internet seems to provide.
The difficulty is the radical lack of curation of so much that's on the internet.
The reason the thing the library offered was not just knowledge, but curated knowledge.
And you can never curate everything.
Princeton's copy of Norman Cone's book, Warrent for Genocide, has marginal notes by someone who took it as proving that the protocols of Elders of Zion were genuine, which is the reverse of the argument of the book.
So it doesn't matter what you do. You can't keep readers safe.
Nonetheless, anyone who just works as much as I do with Google Books knows what it's like to work with a magnificent, endless, and totally uncurrated body of material.
And it's not like going to what's on the shelf in the library.
Not too similar of the work that the librarians at Alexandria did.
They had 20 or 100 versions of Homer, and they had to edit one that was more or less coherent and more or less factual.
What metaphor of the library do you think your students would choose?
That's a really good question.
I think it means community and knowledge sharing to them.
Like Erasmus.
Yeah, I think that's what I think that is the undergraduates.
The graduate students would have a much more knowledge-based metaphor, much more of what we think.
But I think the undergraduates, it's a different kind of place.
And the place and engagement metaphors and the inspiration metaphors would be stronger than the knowledge and organization of knowledge metaphor.
My own sense, for example, is that browsing doesn't go on a lot.
And since every library is now read...
But the history stacks, the literature stacks don't get much browsing.
You never see people there with a heap of books.
And one reason for that is the library is so incomplete.
Even a very big one.
Our graduate students see it as a transfer center where they're mostly going in and getting books from other libraries ordered electronically rather than depending on what's there.
And the place that supplies them to various indices and the transfer center is a great...
And the transfer center to all of the really powerful digital databases that we're paying for in which the graduate students use very skillfully.
Exactly.
You're right about browsing. I, oddly enough, have the privilege of granting stack privileges because we're a closed stack library.
And when I grant these stack privileges, it presses up against the notion of metaphor because the recipient doesn't think they've reached paradise.
They're convinced they've reached paradise.
It's no longer metaphor.
It's actuality.
And that is the elimination of borders.
It's the elimination of borders giving access to the stacks, which is so important nowadays because picking up on what you were mentioning about whether the fact that we are nomadic makes the...
It gives the library a certain sense.
I'm puzzled by a paradox that the Hebrews who are nomadic people hold the book.
The book is a library as the monument of their society, the identity, the place to which you go, in which you always are.
While the Greeks who wrote all their stuff, their letters, their documents, their literature, they wrote it down, they didn't care for the library as much as a center of the identity of their society.
For Athens it was the temple.
It was the agora.
I don't know how to explain that, but just to point out the paradox, and that in our time where we are a world of refugees and immigrants and transients, maybe the library can give people with changing nationalities a sense of place.
Well, that's been true for the public library in America for many deaths.
The library did in the most glorious way.
In Queens, right? In Queens? In the early generation?
In 42nd Street.
Absolutely.
Perhaps there's something to the ark, as the holder of this girl that goes with all of our church metaphors and the sacredness of all of this that goes way back.
Yes, perhaps it's that.
But there is something about the publicness of a public library, and it's very existence that regardless of what else goes on inside and how that's transforming, that the fact that we are a society that values that, that put resources into the building
of public spaces like this, I think says something very important to this day.
And of course, we have to think about Andrew Carnegie and the role of philanthropy in all of this.
But still, the political economy of all of it is, I think, quite important.
I think about public goods, not in the sense of the public good as a kind of aspiration, but as a kind of commodity.
A public good in the sense of a bridge or a lighthouse or a vaccine discovery or, you know, other things like that that have two qualities.
One is in the technical sense that economists use the term public good.
One is that it's non-rival, which is to say that if one person uses it, there's still just as much left for everybody else.
So a lighthouse is a good example of that.
And that it's non-exclusive.
That once it's there, you can't really easily keep people out of it.
So you can keep people out of the stacks.
But I'm talking about public libraries here.
And those are, that inclusivity is a marvelous symbol.
But because of those two characteristics, public goods are notoriously hard to finance.
Everybody wants to free ride.
And we have to turn either to the government or to philanthropy in order to produce these kinds of public goods.
And sometimes I worry that as a society we've forgotten how to do that.
And when I walk past the library, I say maybe we once knew, maybe we'll remember again,
and maybe keeping up these kinds of benefits to society is something that we can all be reminded of.
What's been impressive to me is that it could change any day, of course, but the remarkable health of public libraries.
There was a moment of despair.
And really quite a resurgence, town after town after town supporting it.
Because it's been so important to community.
And it's to make almost counterintuitive in this day and age, but deeply heartening.
And it seems to be so deeply connected to the American ideal of self-improvement.
And the library is the place where you can do that.
So I hope that persists.
It's a refuge from the market system.
And you can put it there.
A good example of the use of a library as a metaphor for the American society, because elsewhere in the world is completely different.
In Colombia, which has the best library network in Latin America, and perhaps one of the best in the world,
they have developed with very few resources a library network that has gone into the Sierra and into dangerous places.
And where they have gone, violence has dropped by 70, 80%.
With the Carnegie idea that the government puts half and the community puts half, whether it's in services or money or anything.
So these libraries become symbols embraced by the little villages or the native groups.
And the change is extraordinary.
So the libraries are seen, perhaps as light houses, but also as sanctuaries, places of sanity.
Now, of course, in other places, if something different in France, censorship started entering the libraries,
not in the sense that Darnton gives it in the 18th century, but in Sarkozy's France.
So a mayor of France, for instance, decided that the public library would not have works by North African writers,
and eliminated those from the library.
So that is another metaphor for the library.
The library has an exclusive identity.
It's my identity, and I don't want any of your stuff in it.
But it also implies a question about what is the role of private libraries, especially when you have government interfering with...
Yes.
And the history of private libraries and preserving knowledge, and any thoughts about that?
Well, most public libraries begin as private as it is.
There's often a correlation, isn't there, with countries that have great book shops and private libraries and don't have necessarily great public libraries?
Italy, when I first lived there, had incredible book shops now mostly gone, and incredible private collections.
But there were individual research libraries, which were fantastic, but just finding a general collection where you could work was extremely difficult.
Exactly.
Well, but it makes me think of Robert Putnam's work about civic organizations, and how countries, as a whole, even politically seem to be able to function better,
where there are more of these working civic organizations.
And that may be theater groups.
It might be red cross groups.
It could be all kinds of things.
But perhaps libraries belong in that category as well, as in a sense, engines of social capital.
There are places where we learn how to communicate with one another, we learn about how to relate to one another, we learn about other cultures,
ideally, if you're not in France, in that particular city.
But you learn about how to do things as a group.
And even literally how to build an institution that doesn't rely on the normal sorts of market forces, the normal sorts of financing.
And that to me is really quite important, as I was starting to say before, it's almost a refuge from the usual market system that so pervades what we do these days,
that you can go and read a book about Paris and not be immediately bombarded by advertisements for flights to Europe.
Right?
I'll see cases.
Yeah.
Yeah, and we've recently witnessed the defeat of a real experiment in America to build a commercial market based third space in the vast mega bookstore,
which rose and for some time appeared to be out doing public libraries, especially for the middle and upper middle classes.
It's the copy.
Yeah, but also more amenities and a richer selection of new books.
And that experiment has clearly failed and is clearly basically dying, which once again just emphasizes the deep importance of what you're saying.
There's another element that I want to bring in that I'm realizing is culturally different.
So American librarians, and to some extent British, and there are in a few other places, but not universally, are not just keepers and preservers of things,
but are passionate about the sanctuary concept, are past, shown about the inclusivity.
They're passionate about open access and when you were talking about restricted books.
So, you know, the American Library Association's freedom to read foundation would be all over that public library.
I mean, you sort of can't really do that.
I mean, you can try that in this country and librarians will be lobbying all over the place as they are on, you know,
with issues related to privacy and access to library records and things like that.
And I've been told, you know, by folks about how amazed people are at the effectiveness of librarian lobbies because, you know, librarians, how can you say bad things about them?
Yeah.
So, and I think that that is also part of the culture that is not probably true internationally.
Because you have to have a strong economy to have power with an intellectual group.
It's a luxury.
Nevertheless, Columbia has it.
Yeah, it does happen.
They're brave too.
They are very brave.
Can I share with you a metaphor, if that's what it is, that I heard fairly recently from a friend who's a colleague of Carols,
named Michael Stuller, who's the Dean for Collections there.
And I see him a few times a year as my conduit into academic library world and because of his very good humor.
And he came up with a, back from a meeting and he came up with a phrase that knew would shock me.
And there are many librarians of research institutions these days, actively having conversations about what shall we do with all of our books.
It's his market driven.
It's fundamentally about real estate.
They're trying to grapple with questions and I'm with the momentous.
How many copies do we need of various books, journals, titles?
Can we have regional centers?
And the term that he knew would make me spill my soup was.
Librarian referred to their collection as underperforming assets.
A sure way to get the attention of the faculty on our campus is to tell them that you're moving books to a storage warehouse.
And believe me, you hear from everyone about how impossible that is and how ridiculous and, but I think the experience of the
institution is a very important thing.
And most of the libraries is that when everyone goes ahead and does it with some of the books, as long as there are provisions for recovering them quickly.
That is wildly successful.
And people are glad to have the space for other things.
But there is this holding on tight to the physical presence of it that I certainly understand, but it's different from throwing them away.
You're accessible with a click of a computer key.
So that's different.
But it's not easy to get books away.
No, it's not.
Actually, I had a huge mathematics library that I wanted to give.
And even the university libraries wouldn't take it.
I'll take it in Shanghai.
That's tough.
We will take it too.
No, I actually sent some of them to a different place.
Because in that sense, I love an anecdote of Nicholson Barker.
He was looking for a book, and he discovered that the only copy was at the Boston Athenaeum, published in the mid-19th century.
So he went to the Boston Athenaeum, also the book.
It was there.
They gave it to him.
And he noticed that he was the first person to take it out for 100 years.
And he said to the librarian, you know, I'm the first borrower.
And the librarian said, of course, sir, we bought it for you.
Books are very patient.
Absolutely.
I always feel I'm liberating them when I take a book out for Princeton for the first time.
And it gets its stamp and it leaves the library.
Yes.
So, I mean, there are some difficulties.
I mean, here's one that I haven't seen written about.
But when we began at Firestone to have real space troubles in the 70s, naturally, one of the things we did was to get rid of big multi-volume things.
And big multi-volume things are not, in fact, they need to be browsed.
Digital browsing is not very effective with that kind of thing, and you often get the wrong volume when you order one to be brought back.
For example, we had the whole Algama in Alito-Autut's item, which was the TLS of 18th and 19th century Germany, right in the stacks.
And in fact, nothing has replaced having the whole thing as an asset.
We had to do it, but that's a real loss.
You zapped another paradox of the library under the shadow of Alexandria as well.
You have to have everything, and the definition of the library is a collection that always exceeds its base.
No matter if you have a hundred books, you find that the shelf is too small.
Do we think that, and you started to allude to what I think,
that the library metaphor can be so powerful that it's too often applied to the Internet.
And you talked about the difference in curation and the difference in gaps,
and that in a way it's been a somewhat destructive metaphor because of that.
I don't know how to get around that or out of that, but it's, you know, it's...
It shouldn't? Yeah. Yeah. What would you call it?
I mean, it's a kind of library.
The blank?
So it does seem to me that the way we do Internet research is the way we manufacture things.
That is, you go when you need something. It's on time.
You don't stockpile anymore.
Whereas classical library research was much more a matter of systematic stockpiling,
but there wasn't really another way of going at it.
But you wouldn't have kept absolutely everything.
Perhaps a comparison, it's not necessarily a metaphor for the Internet.
It would be something like the Genetas.
Yeah. Yeah.
The room in the
room.
So it's really good.
There's a lot of rubbish in there, of course.
But you can do new kinds of research.
Absolutely.
And perhaps the Internet is something like that.
That's beautiful, yes.
I think Carol does have a good point.
There are finding another metaphor and not imposing an older metaphor on the information
that the Internet provides because it's misleading.
And even the digital public library is a classic case of a well-intentioned effort
that was so confined by the traditional notion of librarian metaphor that perhaps the result
or the product they were after wasn't as successful as it might have been
if they could have taken a fresher look and not have been so constrained by the traditional metaphor.
But also like any metaphor, there are parts of it that hold and parts of it that don't.
And we tend to take for granted since it's relatively new that what we put into the Internet
is archived and will be there forever.
Yeah, absolutely.
And it's not.
And I need only to remind you of the scientists who have been over the last few months,
desperately and quickly trying to retrieve data from government websites that they fear will soon disappear.
We have this problem in another area.
I've been collecting for the library writers' archives.
And we're young countries, so we have 150, maybe 200 years of written material.
But the last two generations, all their correspondence, all their manuscripts are electronic.
We have some success bringing to the library the electronic material manuscripts.
Well, that's not called the manuscripts, drafts of books.
But the correspondence is very difficult to collect and choose from.
We can't ask the writers to spend an enormous amount of time filtering their correspondence.
We can't do it because we're going to very private things.
And we haven't found a system.
But we know that we have to collect it.
And I was speaking to somebody at the Library of Congress about this because they have obviously the same problems.
Google's already doing that for you.
They're reading everything.
They're reading everything.
But are they preserving it?
And I think...
Well, you say can make money on it.
Exactly.
I think, and that's a place where we don't have the commercial resources.
And it is an area where libraries are under-resourced and even the Library of Congress because we do have to preserve the Internet.
We do have to preserve email.
And then we need electronic technological tools to mine it.
Because as you say, we can't curate it in advance. We have to be able to save it on moss.
And then we have to be able to thread through it electronically.
And I am encouraged every day at developments and new professions that we hired a digital archivist about four years ago for just exactly the kinds of material that you are.
Well, there is a method, as you say, for people's manuscripts and records.
Email.
There's a group convening now that's working on email very strongly.
Right.
You let me know where that is.
I'm kind of obsessed.
This is my new cause about Internet preservation and digital preservation.
And it's a huge challenge.
There was a conference recently of kind of very techie types talking about reconfiguring the Internet into something that would self-preserve.
But we are a long ways, I think, from doing that.
But there will have to be technological solutions, but they need to be pressed by archivists and curators.
And so we need to work together in this.
And where the clock is ticking as with all those government sites, everybody is madly downloading.
And then once we find a method to do that, we will have to go to the bureaucratic aspect of this and have, for instance, a legal deposit include things like blogs and certain correspondence and so on.
But we are far from that.
And we've lost an enormous amount.
Oh, yes.
Yes.
Yes.
We won't get back.
So I should have said at the beginning that although I work at the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, that nothing I say is necessarily the opinions of that foundation, although it should be.
But one of the projects that the Sloan Foundation helped with, in addition to, of course, the Digital Public Library of America and many others, is the Internet Archive.
And that was before I joined the foundation, but I think it's something to be proud of.
And I believe that we had some hand in it.
And the best part of it, and one of the favorite names of any foundation project that I know, is that they have something called the Wayback Machine.
And for those of us who grew up watching Peabody and Sherman, right, the Wayback Machine is just what it sounds like.
And just the same as in the cartoon, where you're able to, not with everything completely, but that's certainly the aspiration, that you're able to look at what a given website was on a given date in the past.
And the thing about IA though is, it, you know, really, it's one guy's vision.
It's Bruce Smith.
Yes, it is.
And thank God.
You know, we're with the little help from his foundation.
Yeah, right.
It wasn't all his dollars, but, and we start cultural institutions still have a caught up with that.
You know, I mean, we're working with him all the time, but that was, that was just the luck of one visionary individual.
Well, no, it's the luck of our culture that we've been able to start doing that, and we need to think about how to do it more.
And I would just mention that the foundation is also quite interested, not just in saving books and websites and all the rest, but also research data.
And research data can be enormously taxing to sort through to make it useful to preserve it.
So these are all questions of the provision of public goods.
Do you have an office, a group of people working on this?
Where does this happen?
Well, there's the Alpha Pissant Foundation is a small office, not far from here.
And there are a handful of us who think about, well, as I put it, we're in the public goods business.
And I have a colleague, Josh Greenberg, who's very, very much involved with all of these things and knows much more about libraries than I do.
And we try to very strategically do some of the things that a private foundation can do that neither the government nor the market system will take care of.
The Mellon Foundation did.
And of course, we're not the only one. We work with other foundations.
But it's one of the reasons why these things have happened in America.
It's really an accident of our tax laws that there have been these foundations and that Carnegie saw to spend some of his fortunes on libraries and so on.
So it is something not to be taken for granted, certainly that I appreciate.
And are you sharing this with other countries?
Yes, there are conferences on, and actually the European Union has done a certain amount of work in this arena research as well.
And on the, your library is probably not a member, but could join the international Internet Preservation Consortium, which is.
So, and I'll send you a few weeks.
Yes, I will send you a few weeks.
But there's, there's, as a historian, I mean, I do see some wider problems.
One is that more of the net is, of the web is closed and open.
And nobody, no public agency is tasked with preserving that.
And if you want to know, I mean, most of the data moving digitally, electronically, are not publicly accessible.
Right.
And that's a big part of the history we're living. That's where all of those credit card purchases that you make, which allow corporations to know where you are and what you do.
And, you know, all of that is also part of the history of the moment.
And I don't know how it will ever be as visible.
I'm in the preservation business, so please don't misunderstand me.
But is it, is it perhaps because we're looking at the Internet as a library that we're expecting the same conservation and preservation issues as a library?
If we saw this as something else, and I don't have a good suggestion, what could we...
I'm thinking of it more as documentary archival resources.
But documentary archival resources that you talked about not being able to pre-select, but having to vacuum in somehow and then process somehow.
So I don't think it's the library part, but that's a good question.
And I think the struggle about Internet is what... If we could say... We do need a metaphor for the Internet because we can understand better what the IT is, we might be able to grapple with it better.
And of course, as you all know better than I do, we've always lost a significant or majority of what was created.
So losing things is something that we've been used to for the past time.
But the difference is you can't find it in an attic later. I mean, this is the thorny part is the absoluteness of it.
But maybe I don't want to give up the metaphor of the library entirely.
Because, again, Alexandria, we think that Alexandria was lodged in a corridor of the museum,
which was the house of the Muses and the Muses' mother was never seen in memory.
So it has that connection to memory. And so perhaps what we want to preserve is an effort of not allowing ourselves to forget more that we need to forget.
I agree. The impulse is powerful. Just like the impulse for the universal library is very powerful.
Absolutely. So it comes back to the word curation, which I think is very, very important in all of this.
But it also comes back to this false impression that we have that it's all free.
So I'm going to contradict a little of what I said before about the financial considerations being something that we don't have to worry about.
The library is, again, an example of something with very, very large fixed costs to get a library going and very small marginal costs.
To have one more person read another book is really essentially costless.
Or to have one more person walk into the library at NYU is virtually costless.
And so you begin to post one more thing on the internet and so on.
So you begin to think of this as really being costless, but it's not.
It's really very, very expensive. And those fixed costs have to be somehow dealt with.
And this is one of the great problems of our time.
Because if you think about it, many, many public goods have that character.
And it's one of the things which we previously thought of as commercial goods.
So, for example, the very first copy of a newspaper is hugely expensive.
All of the time and effort that went into that.
The next few copies, almost truly.
The first working pill that comes out of a big pharma is fabulously expensive.
And so when you think about the economy like this, and it's part of the technological transformation
that we've been through, is that we get fooled into thinking that another piece of writing,
another piece of data, another piece of almost anything that we do that's
technologically and electronically like this, we don't have to worry about the cost.
And we don't have to make the hard decisions about what to keep and what not to keep,
and what's worthwhile and what isn't worthwhile.
And so that's a real danger in all of this, both from a financial point of view,
and how we're going to do important things to society when the technology has turned around so much of this.
But it's also just the way that we think about things and the way that we don't value
some of the things that really are valuable, like a writer's letter to someone.
It just seems like another...
Except, as we all know, we don't know what is valuable until we know that we have lost it.
Someday in the future, the recording of this conversation will be absolutely essential
because Ken will have the made president of the United States,
and this is the place where he took that decision.
We don't know if that is going to happen.
I hope for your sake that it won't.
But that's actually part of the economics of information altogether.
One I mentioned before is that makes it so peculiar as a commodity.
One is that you don't use it up.
One is that it's hard to keep people from getting on it.
But another is that you have no idea what it's worth until you've already consumed it.
Which is the reason why if you just go at these things with commercial sensibilities, you are in trouble.
We do have some paradoxes.
One of which is in some ways the Google library is the...
Until the power goes off, it's the safest library there's ever been.
It's multiplied back up, it's constantly refreshed, it's in these enormous server banks all over the world.
There's actually never been as safe a library.
Until Google gets bored?
Yes, until the power goes off.
But also it's in the hands of a commercial act.
Absolutely.
But in addition to that, it's also the worst curated such collection.
So it's safer than Widener.
One really bad explosion in the boiler system and Widener is a thing of the past.
And yet Widener is the greatest curated collection of information there is anywhere.
I think this is very little understood in the world that we...
Google is spending an enormous amount of money to keep this sort of cod thing,
which they're obviously not going to complete as they had planned.
At this point they must just be trying to decide what's the least embarrassing way to give it to HathiTrust or something like that and stop.
But yeah, I think it would be really...
It's one of these things that would be so wonderful if you could get some of this information into the public realm.
Because I think it's very little known and understood in even the wider sort of thinking, reading public.
And that's another aspect of the internet that makes it not a library.
It's so predominantly commercial.
Yes.
And we think of Google as the air we breathe that we can't live without.
And you know, it's got a board and income and it could just go like that and change everything if it shows.
Another difference is that there is a hierarchy of truth in a library that doesn't exist on the internet or barely.
So all these alternative facts that we are seeing now.
In a conversation the other day, a phrase stuck with me that the library is the place of evidence.
And it seems so important to remember that a library is a place where you have a collection of facts.
Some facts contradict each other.
You have lies of course, but there is a system of curating that filters most of it, not everything.
While on the internet I can find proof that the earth is flat and know nothing to contradict it unless I look for it.
So perhaps the idea of the hierarchy of truth is part of the difference.
The library also places unequivocal demands which the internet doesn't.
When I was learning my field my supervisor was the great Hannah Holborn Gray who later became president of the University of Chicago.
And we had a very good library at the University of Chicago and the new area bit down the road.
And every week Mrs. Gray would give me readings and I would read primary sources in Latin and then there would be the secondary sources.
There was a book in English, it wasn't very good.
It was a book in French, a little better but not really good.
It was a book in Italian, that was okay, but the book in German.
That was always the right book.
And that's how libraries work.
They challenge you with this polyglot varied, tiered world of very edition.
And the internet again doesn't really work that way. You can make it work that way if you want.
But it's not designed to do that to you in quite the same way.
Perhaps going back to the idea of metaphor, the internet has not yet found excellent librarians.
Because I'm far from being an expert. I don't know what the country of expert is because I am the country of expert as far as the internet is concerned.
And I use it very rarely and it frustrates me enormously.
But maybe my son tells me that it's because I haven't found the right search tool if I'm using the right term.
I haven't found the right librarian.
It's as if I went into a library and I'm looking for something and the catalogue is not enough.
I need a reference librarian.
And that is what I don't find on the internet.
The internet is dynamic and constantly changing.
So that's what makes it totally uncontrollable in the way that reference books and refereed articles which went by a much slower rhythm were.
A stable text is not the right way to try to control what's coming out and becoming accessible on the internet.
You have, we don't have a librarian. We all understand that.
What you have are very, very clever advertisers who know every click that you're making.
So they'll know as much about what you're doing as your librarians have printed and know what you're doing.
But they won't advise me a librarian.
They'll direct you but they will not advise you with any sense of benevolence.
You'll have to explain to me how that happens because I haven't found it in a way that's satisfying.
Because no one can make money on that.
Right.
There we are.
To the extent that the internet is able to make money, they're very good at doing that.
Because they follow your clicks. They read not literally but they browse your email and they know about what sorts of things you like.
And there are these very fast auctions to decide exactly what advertisement to show to you, given your past and given all the records of what you've done on the internet.
And indeed all the records of things that you haven't done on the internet that are also taken into account.
So there is a very, very finely developed system of making recommendations.
Not just for what the next video is that you should order but for everything that you want to do commercial that someone can make money on.
The issue is that the kind of scholarship, the kind of curation, the kind of work that libraries do, the kind of thing that we value because that's who we are, you can't make money on that.
It's the antithesis of the library because it's not the information and the content that's curated.
It's you, you're rated.
That is very good. That is excellent. That explains it.
And much of the best material on the internet.
In the first years of printing, one of the ways that quality was maintained, the printers could not afford to hire characters of the quality that they needed.
One of the best ways that you did that was by getting a Franciscan to be your corrector.
Because proofreading is an ascetic task and the Franciscan would just be doing his job.
And you really couldn't give him any money because he was a Franciscan.
And many of the websites that I use, if you're interested in Latin texts written in the Renaissance, you go to White Trash Scriptorium, which is a text entirely made and curated by one noble person who likes to put up texts of Latin authors.
You go to the Shakespeare Institute in Birmingham, which happens why the Shakespeare Institute in Birmingham to have an updated, dynamic list of Latin texts available on the web.
And these things, it really is the equivalent of those Franciscans.
These things are done by people who sacrifice themselves because they somehow enjoy or feel virtue is doing it.
But I've thought about this for scholarly work in the context of mathematics because Google will probably not, in any time soon, develop, find search tools for looking for formulas or theorems or any of the rest of it because they really can't make money.
But isn't this actually work?
This is really essential.
So that's a kind of an extreme case.
The dual infomititions use the internet to call it out.
They certainly use the internet and it's certainly fantastically useful to be able to pull up papers and from scattered journals here and there and all of the rest of it.
But it's not so easy to find what you want.
And so there have been a number of grants, maybe the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, to try to fill in this gap in, say, mathematical search because the commercial interests and others won't do it otherwise.
Isn't Wikipedia the mathematical definitions there are maintained as accurately and updated by mathematicians?
Yes.
So Wikipedia for math is a reliable reference in a way that it isn't for history.
It is not for literature.
No, or history, or classics, or most other things.
No, it's rather well curated.
And there's a lot of mathematics that you can learn there.
And duty requires me to mention that the funding and shaping of Wikipedia was another thing that the Sloan Foundation was very much involved with.
And if you think about public goods, and I'm not sure how to mention this, I just did mention it.
That was when I'm not sure how to measure this.
But there are people who say that Wikipedia is the largest public good in the history of mankind.
I don't know how you measure it.
But it certainly is some kind of public good that's rather significant and perhaps overused or misused, but still really pretty terrific in many ways.
How much there's no objection, I think, you have some nodding heads on that, I agree.
Oh, I think we're all totally dependent on Wikipedia even when we're infuriated by some of its rules.
I'm struck by how much we're talking about the Internet, and you were asking before for metaphors for the Internet.
And I'd like to say the opposite.
I don't want any more metaphors for the Internet.
I'm afraid that the Internet is becoming a metaphor to us for everything else, in the same way that perhaps in an earlier age that the Internet is becoming a metaphor to us for everything else,
in the same way that perhaps in an earlier age that the assembly line became a metaphor, consciously or not so consciously, for many, many things,
and the educational system was arguably put together with that kind of metaphor in mind.
I want metaphors for other things, because it's so taken over the way that we think about the world that I'm not worried about getting a metaphor for the Internet.
And metaphors for other sorts of things that are also compelling, that are also capture people's imaginations, and that make sure that they know that there are other ways of thinking about the world besides clicking on something.
But that's because you're a mathematician, and you use an exact language.
We who have to use the language of words, because it's so unreliable, we have to go to metaphors to have that.
No, I wasn't saying anything about the power and importance of metaphors. I believe in that deep.
I was saying that I would rather spend my time looking for metaphors for other things besides the Internet.
But I was like...
Because the Internet itself is already becoming such a powerful archetype, such a powerful metaphor, and everyone's thinking.
I was trying to find a metaphor for the Internet that would put it in its place.
Well, I would settle for that. That's fine.
But I don't know what that is.
I'm talking, as you say, so much about the Internet.
But I suspect that the next generation, or the generation after that, will look at the Internet and look at it in the same way that we look at the typewriter now.
I don't know... I'm told that there are new technologies that are being developed that won't use the Internet, will use something like the cloud to communicate with the chip in our brain.
I don't know if this is science fiction or wishful thinking.
Or the opposite of wishful thinking.
Well, on that unsettling note, I'm going to open things up to the audience here.
I'm checking our brain.
You'd like to ask a question, but please line up the microphone.
Please keep it in the form of a question.
I would like to find out if anyone here thinks there might be a way to establish a library for artwork.
I live in a community where a lot of artists continue to make art.
And I have seen a lot of the art that they produce go into dumpsters when they die.
And I realize you talked about curating.
And I'm really not talking about making a museum. I'm talking about making a place that has a curated, but much larger and much more inclusive selection of the works, visual knowledge.
It's not only words. It can be visual.
And that's what visual artists do.
I would anyone like to talk about A.B. Warburg.
You mentioned Warburg.
It was a way of...
Why don't you answer the question?
Warburg's library was organized first via the associations of visual images that were meant to lead you into language.
It's an interesting question.
Earlier we were talking about how people like to browse images.
And is that another way to organize a library in terms of not just through initially language, but images as Warburg?
And the real thing, not reproductions, not books about art, but the art itself.
I think your concept of art as physical visual document, as opposed to art as revered object in a museum, is a very interesting one.
And we seem to have this kind of extreme of...
Libraries and museums have these different traditions of the way they catalog, make things available, hoard and bring out for exhibits versus begging people to use all the time.
And so that is actually the first time I've heard somebody interested in the arts.
How can I say willing to talk about art objects as documents and not quite as sacred?
So the question then is, they're still extremely cumbersome, expensive documents to store, maintain, index catalog, provide access to.
So if you think that digitized images of them would not be a substitute, because there are great image libraries, then back to the public good issue.
Is there a compelling enough argument that would gain sufficient philanthropy to do that?
I think it's a great concept.
I've really never heard it. I think we make art objects overly special in that sense, and we don't have enough museums and historical societies set up with study centers where you can really learn from them.
There's a model in your historical societies used in their loose center and a few others are adopting it, but that was still expensive to create and produce.
So I think it's back to the... what is the inspiration to get that paid for?
That's a very challenging question. What do we retain? What photographs do we retain? What paintings do we retain?
We'll retain your maybe pictures, but we wouldn't necessarily retain money.
I tell you you're elected president.
We do not have an exchange.
You did emphasize that libraries do curate. So you do make decisions.
It seems to me there could be decisions, restrictions, a structure for creating a place that does represent in a much larger scope the visual production of what we do.
So it seems like it could be done.
Can I make a tangential remark about visual items?
So we've been a little bit critical of the way the technology is working and not working for us, but the fact that you can do visual search on the Internet is extraordinary.
That is just unbelievable. And the idea that photographs or pieces of art can be readily identified as a kitten with a sunset behind it.
Right. This is... when it comes to cataloging and you think of the kind of work that's traditionally been done to assign a few words that you could use to search into a physical card catalog.
Or in others kinds of search engines and key wording and things like this.
The idea that artificial intelligence by training it on millions of examples is then able to identify these visual physical other kinds of images is really something very different in the management of information than what we've seen before.
And to me, it's like magic. There are dangers in there, things get wrong, and when you start to classify other than photographs, if you start classifying people and their creditworthiness and everything else like that, I get a little bit worried.
But it's simply in terms of the kind of function that we thought about doing for books, for literature, for that we can now do something like that and have that kind of search for images is, as I say, like magic.
It's akin to the magic of the unconscious.
I mean, when Freud talked about primary process for a second area, and the thing presentations, as opposed to word presentations, is very resonant with that.
Quite literally, this is not formalizable. There are no rules.
No one sat down and wrote down kittens look like this, sunsets look like this, and so on.
It's just that the machines have learned how to do this much the way that a child might learn how to do it.
I wonder whether one way to think about these similar differences and different roles, the libraries and the internet plays today is to consider the difference between knowledge and information, where there's a level in the library of curation.
So, in a sense, you can say that information has been distilled into knowledge, and some God has created and curated and selected particular pieces to be deposited.
And the question is that clearly in the internet, that is not the case, and that's why we have a whole collection of information, whether it's reality or alternative realities.
And the question is whether there is a way to curate the internet or at least exist a certain aspect in which it could play the role that libraries have played up traditionally until not too long ago.
Thank you.
Any takers?
Well, we might not be able to find a metaphor for the internet, but we have to break it down.
And of course, many libraries, organizations, institutions are using the internet in a very effective way that evolves from the processes and the ideals of library work.
So it very much is happening, but there's the commercial dimension that you've spoken about so clearly, and the not-for-profit motivated dimension in which a much of what you describe, I believe, is happening very effectively.
I think the internet is trying to cultivate citizen curation quite a bit, which seems the only way to tackle it.
But as we see, that's a mixed bag.
That's the good and the bad of Wikipedia.
It's so vast that seems the only way to tackle it.
So there's some citizens, and then there's other citizens as they engage in that citizen curation.
And there's certainly subsets of curated things on the internet.
One of the things we try to do in working with students is help them recognize the sources of content on the internet and which of it has had some kind of authoritative or curatorial hand and which has not.
The curation of Wikipedia is really something quite marvelous and really not perfect, as we said before, but really quite marvelous and the social engineering of that has been thought through very carefully.
And I would just, since we've been drawing these distinctions between commercial considerations and more public interest ones, if it got out that a single curator for Wikipedia was being paid,
I think the model would be over the next day.
People are doing it because they're not being paid, because they feel this kind of calling.
And that's one of the reasons why you can trust it.
Because it's not commercial.
Exactly so.
So they're asking you for a donation.
Right, they're asking you for a donation, but it's not a commercial endeavor.
I mean, they do, as I said before, there are large costs to these things, and it has to be born somehow.
And so coming up with sustainable business models for the provision of public goods is something that any one of us who cares about these things, and particularly those of us who are reading grant applications all the time, have to worry about.
And so the fact that there is this roundswell of people who are willing not to be free riders, right?
I mean, that's the issue with all of this, that if you free ride and take advantage of all these sorts of resources without anyone ever wanting to pay for them, then we're in big trouble.
Yes, please.
So to pull together a number of other questions that have been asked or answered or discussed, there's a concept of archives as resistance, and particularly in contemporary archives that are being collected almost as we speak in every country of the world where wars are going on,
people are photographing, people are taking notes, and people are giving oral histories as events are occurring.
And the way history and the way we think of historic libraries, for the most part, is history gives historically the view of the, not of the vanquished, but of the victor.
And so these enormous collections that are being curated, many of which are being put on the internet, but others of which are being given to foundations often, and sometimes foundations work with universities which then digitize the collections,
and so that they're available in multiple formats, seems to be, in a sense, another metaphor being created of archives as resistance.
And historically, in order to find these hidden works, let's say, it could take, you know, going to 50 libraries around the world and then trying to put things together.
You said something which I found fascinating early on, I mean I missed the first part of this discussion, but you seem to make a distinction between knowledge-based archives and reading,
which I found so startling, because the hints that are given sociologically in terms of political science, any other method, or in terms of postmodern readings of literature, of poetry,
of all kinds of things for new clues to things that had just been considered anecdotal, for instance, or even new clues, you know, when Homer wrote about the origin of the Etruscans,
he said they were starving Turks from Lydia, and that part of his historical writing was simply denied, and then, you know, a couple of thousand years later, the evidence is there, from DNA, from different readings of archaeology,
so they're, you know, from textiles, you can find bits and pieces of information from, I mean, from multiple resources, and even in terms of talking about contemporary art,
this discussion has been going on for 30 or 40 years, every art meeting talks about what to do with contemporary people's art, so now there are ways to break down that art into,
in the conservation field, this has been a big issue in terms of funding archival sources, funding libraries versus funding museums versus funding historical venues,
and sometimes there are things written, let's say, on paintings, so you could say this is a historical resource that should be put in a library,
or in other venues, you know, you can't really break down, there are multiple ways to look at all these things, anyhow, I would like to hear, you know, some comments on all these things, but I would like you also, in particular,
to expand on what you said, because I found that terribly distressing to hear someone so central to these discussions saying, oh, there's reading, and then there's knowledge-based material.
Well, the reading part is because I felt we were being too focused on books, that's all, and that defining, that defining, you know, reading, and that a culture of reading is only if you read a book, I felt was too narrow,
and that it denied all the other collecting, and the importance of all the other collecting that you are, in fact, describing.
But is that true? I mean, there's so much-
Well, we were, so then we had a discussion about whether how we were using the word reading, that's all. Yeah, so, I mean, that's, it was in the context of this conversation about how we were using the word reading.
Well, in terms of archiving as resistance, there's a certain sense in which it certainly is. It's resistance against the ravages of time.
But I think you were also talking about the political sense, perhaps. Yes.
And I was in an interesting conversation just yesterday, when somebody said, well, who's archiving the women's march?
And I thought, oh, my goodness, that's a really good question. And so there are attempts already to begin doing that.
But I would add that the Digital Public Library of America, and once again I would say that my colleague, Dorne Weber, is the expert about that.
But I know that one of the original ideas of that was to be able to collect some of the artifacts of small libraries that are scattered through the library.
That are scattered through the United States, the sorts of not history written by the victors. But the rest of it, this, and to digitize that and to make it centrally available catalogued in a way that people who are interested in what goes on historically,
other than in the Great Halls of Power would have access to it.
So most research libraries at this point have, not most, but a good number, very active web archiving, curatorial programs.
And definitely human rights is a big huge one. There's a whole set of libraries working in human rights arena in particular, and trying to divvy up the territory of different kinds of political sites, etc.
So there are things being missed all the time, and then things being very consciously grabbed.
I can't tell you who went right for all the women's movement sites, but there's quite an effort in that.
And this stuff is really hard to manage. We have the Archives of Occupy Wall Street.
That's probably the most difficult collection that we have to deal with, because also of the artifactual elements of that as well as the
archive.
And collecting it was really quite an interesting process.
So libraries are being faced with very new kinds of collecting.
But I think most, at least, academic librarians would be right up there talking about the importance of this kind of content.
It's interesting you mentioned that you have every, correct me if I'm wrong, but you have everything on Occupy Wall Street.
But we have their archives.
Except for the library, because the library had such metaphorical potency that it was discarded by the New York City Police Department, which is another illustration of the power of these metaphors.
Absolutely ritualistic act.
There's a double problem, because the Archives of Power can't be dismissed either.
They have to be read against their grain as well as with it.
And that is, I think, a huge worry.
As in the current political climate, it's not at all clear that national archives will retain the kind of political independence that they have, in many cases, been able to assert.
I think they're going to be under tremendous pressure.
Well, that's where your librarians will march in the streets.
I hope so.
Another question?
Yes, I have a question.
I assume you're sort of microcosm of librarians across the country.
And I would wonder if circulation is down.
I don't know if Ken and I want that responsibility.
If circulation is down, how has that affected your work vis-a-vis publishing houses and all kinds of things that have a direct impact?
Do you order less books and do you get better quotes from the publishing houses?
It's a big business and I worry about it.
So that's a very huge question.
It's very huge redundant, but it's a huge question.
And I'm also the NYU Press reports to me, so I'm a publisher too, so I have to think about that quite a bit.
And publishing is certainly changing.
It's able to make its way by selling fewer books, by selling electronic books, by having print-on-demand.
The whole economy of publishing is quite different because of the ability to do print-on-demand.
So publishing is adapting.
I think the independent bookstore was something we're speaking of, curation.
It's something to worry more about, although that's seeing a tiny resurgence, I hope that stays.
But publishers themselves fortunately, there have been a lot of changes in the costs of the business and the models for the business.
And some of the things we don't like, the conglomerations and things like that, that publishers have been very at, well, are being agile in managing that.
Libraries absolutely do buy fewer books.
It's also subject specific because there are more art books published than ever before internationally.
Our circulation has tripled in the past five years and so has the number of outside researchers, and we added 23,000 books to the library last year, plus digital collections, etc.
So each subject area has its different trends, ours is the idiosyncratic trend.
Because of the image.
Yeah.
I think most of us in humanities are being affected by the multiplication of journals, which are very expensive and which drive books out of the budget between the databases and the journals.
Those are growing exponentially and there just isn't much left.
So, we still buy books, but we don't have the kind of representative collection that we would have had 50 years ago, and nobody does.
But you can get your hands on what you need.
You can get your hands on what you need, but it's soon we're going to be at a moment where Cambridge University press produces one copy of the book, which Harvard buys, because only Harvard can afford it.
I mean, there's a spiral going on, and it's not going to end well.
I mean, we're down to, you know, the library sales of a typical university press book are down to two or three hundred copies.
But most university presses have adapted to the kind of mixed books and the costs of what they're doing.
Most of them are still open.
They have, and they haven't.
I mean, one of the things they don't do is the kind of curation they used to do.
They don't.
They don't have a free, and that they've maintained, but nobody copy edits anymore.
Not quite.
Yes.
We, at the National Library of Argentina, we've gone in the different direction.
I've increased the number of characters and editors, but I have dwindled to almost nothing, the printed books.
We're doing everything digital.
We're saying this.
I feel like the Pope defending Islam.
But we have to do it.
But on the question of journals, there's also the word bundling that comes up.
And there used to be many, many cross-subsidies, which were ways of providing public goods that happen because of bundling of one sort or another.
And the drive towards the commercial, the drive towards doing everything digitally has made people,
I mean, if you think about your cable substitution, right?
The cost of adding another channel is virtually zero, but the cost of getting all of that to you, the fixed cost of doing that is very high.
And again, we're at a loss as to how to price these things in a way that does what society needs.
And once you start unbundling all the cross-subsidies in a research hospital, or all the cross-subsidies in a research university,
then you may be left with only the things that make money.
And that's scarce.
Yes.
Yes.
We'll have to end it.
One more?
Yes, quickly.
Yes, your question, please.
The need of the library is that we store everything.
What about the possibility of ephemera?
Is there a line we ever draw?
The obvious example is what happens to a Bernini fireworks show.
If it happened today, we can photograph it.
But perhaps it was intended to ephemera and legitimately remains ephemera.
And this might put a limit on what we're talking about.
Thank you.
Well, it depends on which ephemera.
We have lots of 17th century fireworks shows because the prints, which record them, are extremely valuable.
They're curated and kept, probably more than 21st century fireworks shows.
But I think ephemera goes back to the whole world of ephemera on the web, some of which are of great value and interest,
and which are certainly not being preserved at the level that would make everybody feel happy and confident about them.
As time goes by, the notion of what has to be preserved of ephemera changes.
I'm sorry to keep talking about the National Library, which we're doing many things.
I've assigned a group of photographers to go out into the cities and photograph graffiti,
because we had no records of the graffiti, because of course, up to a few years, it was considered just vandalism.
So this is an example of what we can do.
But we now have a metaphor for the Internet fireworks show.
I don't know if that's practical.
That's a good one.
Please join me in thanking our discussions today for the professor.
That was fun.
