Which also didn't help.
I didn't realise any of these things.
Yeah, yeah.
The wood, right.
Oh, okay.
Hello.
You're gonna keep us in line.
Now, what's your...
Sorry, I'm covering this because it's all...
What's your...
I'm gonna say...
No problem.
Okay.
We've heard of the very single response that's said in the moment.
So do you go under my office?
Very
I'm getting more
and I haven't quite really came yet to go back and forth.
So I'm kind of...
I'm not formally involved in the online.
That's quite a track back and forth between New End.
And so you live in?
I'm Ed Nurse-Secian, the Director of the Centre.
Thank you for being here this afternoon.
Before I present the participants in the RAM table,
I'd like to say a couple of words about the upcoming programs.
Our next program is going to be in April.
I think it's April 27th.
It's on the Anthropocene about climate change.
After that, we have a round table in May on shame.
And then in June, early June, I think it's the 7th of June,
we have a round table on status.
And we are now working on the round tables for the fall.
We have narrowed down to about five or six objects,
and they'll be on our website shortly.
I would present the participants alphabetically
and they can raise their hand, so you know who they are.
And I'm going to be very brief in their bios,
as you all have, I think, the printouts.
Kenneth Deal is Professor of Physics and Chemistry
at Stony Brook University and Director of the Laufer Centre
for Physical Biology.
He helps solve the protein folding problem
and is interested in the principles of proteins, cell evolution,
and the early molecular origins of life.
Pre-annataraean, pre-annataraean, I should say, more formally.
He's Professor of Astronomy and Physics at Yale University.
His research is focused on exotica in the Universe Dark Matter,
Dark Energy and Black Holes.
She's noted for her key contributions to two of the most challenging problems
in cosmology, mapping the distribution of dark matter
and tracing the growth history of black holes.
Some of you have maybe gotten hold of what we printed out
about a prediction she made that has finally been proven correct.
She made the prediction 20 years ago when she was a graduate student
at Cambridge University.
She predicted that cosmic winds driven by black hole could potentially
carry gas and other star-making materials thousands of years away
from their host galaxy.
And apparently now that has been proven correct.
There was some controversy around it, but it has been proven correct.
Dennis Overby, sitting there, is the cosmic of Flair's correspondent
for the New York Times.
His reporting can range from the mating habits of black holes
and zero-gravity fashion shows to science in the movies,
the status of Pluto and the fate of the Universe.
He's the author of two books, Lonely Hearts of the Cosmos,
the Story of the Scientific Quest for the Secret of the Universe,
which was a finalist for the National Book Critics Award for Nonfiction,
and Einstein in Love a Scientific Romance.
Caleb Scharff,
he's a director of Astrobiology at Columbia University.
His research career spans cosmology, exoplanetary science,
and Astrobiology.
He currently leads efforts at Columbia University in New York
to understand the nature of exoplanets and living environments in the Universe.
He's also a global science coordinator of the Earth Life Sciences Institute's
Origins Network at the Tokyo Institute for Technology
and the co-founder of Y House Inc.
That's Y House Inc.
The rent table today was initiated by
a communications editor and I had together,
and he has helped me in the planning of this rent table.
He's professor of astrophysical sciences at Princeton University
and an affiliate scientist at the University of Tokyo,
Tokyo's Kavli Institute for the Physics and Mathematics of the Universe.
He has carried out extensive astronomical observations
at numerous U.S. and international observatories.
Working in both theoretical and observational astrophysics,
he has published more than 250 research papers
with concentration on the broad range of topics.
So with that, we can start.
It's what we're talking about.
Should I start?
I thought I'd start by talking about
the theme of this afternoon is life in the Universe.
I want to mention two aspects that particularly fascinate me.
First is a recent development,
which is the expansion of the code of life as it were,
the sort of development of the synthesis of new eight additional four letters
in the genetic code synthetically done.
Just reported very recently, just about a month ago,
and I think Kent can probably elaborate a little bit more on
what the implications are, but the implications are just astounding
because these additional four constituents,
in our DNA we have GCA and T,
and these expansion of those four to eight,
just combinatorially sort of increases the number of ways
in which you could possibly create life
and broaden the definition of what life really is.
So I found that very, very new development, very exciting to read.
So I don't actually work on astrobiology myself,
but I regard myself as someone who takes a lot of intellectual risks
and is sort of bold.
So I thought a lot about the ways in which our conceptions of what life is,
and therefore its probability of occurring as we know it,
similar to us, I think we've limited our possibilities.
And I think we should open up our imaginations
to really speculate about sort of wild other forms of life.
And I think in the past, historically people have been bolder
than we have been,
and I sort of invite us to think more broadly about what could be life.
And the second point I sort of wanted to make was about a new way
to think about what really life is,
and thinking about life and intelligent life.
So these have been debates in the field across disciplines.
Maybe think about life not just as the possibility for self-replication
and so on, but also think about it more broadly
so that we can bring in the concept of intelligent life
as the ability to produce information
and the period for which that information could last.
So we could think about how advanced a civilization is, for example,
because these are going to come up when we talk about how we assess
whether we can have intelligent life elsewhere.
And I think there's a way, you know, if you look at the amount of information
that's...
Whoops.
It's just you in the past.
I can hear the past!
Yeah, we'll see you in the past.
So I think if we, you know, I'd like to think about,
so if you look at DNA and how much information there is, right,
and we look at all the information in the books
and the knowledge that we've created, we actually quantify that,
I think this capacity to generate
information that is multifold, so in our case
it's about, you know, 500,000 to a million times, more than the material,
the information that constitutes us. That could be a new way of thinking about
intelligence.
I'll just stop that.
I'm going to take a look at my book.
I'm going to say about it.
I actually wanted to jump in.
So you brought it up and I think it's really interesting and I'm curious to get
people's reactions. This new piece of work, I think it was Steve Benner and his group,
who constructed essentially DNA
with eight letters, if you will, eight base pairs
rather than in the alphabet rather than four.
You know, I think it's clearly a
wonderful technical piece of work, but I have some questions about it
and I'm wondering if anyone else has some thoughts on this.
So it seems to me it's a proof of possibility, but it's not a proof of existence.
And part of the reason I think it's not proof of existence
by any stretch of imagination is it's one thing to manufacture
a set of molecules that do something
seemingly more than the naturally evolved set of molecules,
the DNA, but that doesn't tell you that
an organism could have evolved somewhere that utilizes
eight base pairs because of the burden that comes with that.
I assume I'm looking at you because you may have a
response to this. You know, to make use
of eight letters in your code
means you have to have a set of machinery,
a molecular machinery that isn't overly
burdened by the energetic demands of suddenly having to
do what is that, how do you feel about that? I agree. I think where
these new bases are going to be of value as drug discovery
is they're going to give us better handles on being able to go after DNA
and go after the proteins that they make. I don't think it's going to tell us very much
about what life could have done for the following reason
that what living systems now use is 20 amino acids
and so there's this 64 option code
at the moment genetic code and as you say there's costs
too. On the one hand there's combinatorics and that's an advantage because it gives you a new space
of what options could I have and yet biology
settled on essentially 20, a few others, but essentially
20 amino acids and as you say there are costs, there are fitness costs to everything
and one of the things that you see, especially in bacteria, over time
is they really strip down their genomes and they strip down
their machinery to be just as efficient as they possibly can
and so if a 40 letter, if 40 amino acids were a good idea
I think we would see it and we don't and I think the reason
for that is because diversity, chemical diversity, is the thing
that's so powerful in proteins that you don't have in nucleic acids
chemical diversity right now with the 20 amino acids
we have plus charge, minus charge, hydrophobic interactions, salt
bridges, hydrogen bonding, we cover the whole spectrum of
the kinds of things you want to do as a chemist. It covers all the
kinds of little pieces of molecule that you want to
catalyst chemical. With this contingent on the environment and what
is available, so we're talking about earth like conditions right so
I was just arguing for the possibility of imagination
with these right now I'm not necessarily
a realistic rubric for how you would make life but isn't everything
contingent, the ways in which things have evolved are contingent on
the base conditions that were available on earth.
So you could imagine, you can argue yes or no, I mean there's a lot
of things that you can do but there's this classic comment
that nothing in biology can be understood except in the light of evolution
and that's sort of the point of view of I need to know the history of
something in order to know how it works. On the other hand, it's much more like
a sort of thermodynamics problem. Once you know the environment, you can
specify what the thing is, what the biological thing is, think about an eyeball
I don't need to know where it came from but it's really really optimized
to do the job that it does. It sees very well, you can see over nine orders of magnitude
of light intensity between night and day and so forth, really really
optimized and they don't have to know a lot about the history to know about this.
One point coming back to your point though also about polymers is
that not only the DNA but also in proteins now, there's new diversity
and a colleague in California
has developed these molecules called peptoids
it's a different kind of molecule than a peptide, different kind of molecule than a protein
and so it has different kinds of monomer units but they're kind of similar
in certain ways and it turns out they do a lot of the same
kinds of things that real proteins do so in principle,
life could have gone that way too, it could have gone a lot of ways
and why it ended up where it did, I don't know.
If I could say I think that your first point about the
new letters in the column sort of highlights one of
the trade-offs or horns of a dilemma that
our basic genetic code already presents this with
one of the most amazing things about biology is the
incredible diversity of life forms we have
on our, well we say from giants, the koi is to
single-celled organisms
of a huge variety of sorts, the complicated organism, mammals
and things like us, you know, you name it, it's hard to even think about
the huge diversity of things yet they all have the same
genetic code in operation, well why is that possible?
It's like, it's the same reason you can write a huge variety of books or novels
using the letters of the alphabet, you've bought into this
combinatoric world where a finite number of
things let you do a huge variety of things, so you can
write a novel that makes you a giant sequoia tree or you can write a novel that
makes you a fungus and you can do it all with the same
alphabets and you're adding a few letters to the alphabet as it were,
but the other side of that, you know, and when we first
discovered, when it was first discovered that these monomers
make up the polymers, the letters of the alphabet can be synthesized
in natural environments fairly readily and probably
occur, we know it, in fact, occur in many places in nature,
made everyone feel very optimistic about the topic
today, life in the universe, there would be life elsewhere, where we could easily
imagine they have the same alphabet in many places in the universe,
but then the other horn of that dilemma is it becomes like
monkeys typing Shakespearean sonnets, you have, you know, there's so many ways of putting these letters to
gather, the chance that blind
processes, before you get evolution started,
which selects certain things, that blind
processes will write you a experience on it or a
novel or something, starts getting smaller and smaller, and
personally, if, you know, it was somehow revealed to us
that there was no non-terrestrial life anywhere in the observable universe,
if it was just dead, dead, dead out there everywhere, and then
I had to make a guess at why, my guess would be that this is
the only place where the monkeys managed to put together a sonnet, and everywhere else
they wrote nonsense, and life never got started,
I'm not saying that the case, I'm just saying that
would be my best guess as a possibility, adding some letters to the alphabet
doesn't help that problem, in fact it makes it worse, that's
extra keys the monkeys could hit on the keyboard,
and, you know, change a word into some... Well, this nonsense and what a Shakespeare
is defined by us and our culture, you could have a culture
that defines what we call nonsense, is valuable.
Well, it could be that there, in fact I think it's more likely, in fact, that if there's
something else out there, it's quite different from us. Exactly. But
it still has to be something that works, you know,
that reproduces itself, or that at least persists, even if it doesn't reproduce.
So I think that's these new codes sort of
add to that, that, uh,
trade-off that we face. I like the idea of
nonsense being valued, or sort of, I mean, but then of course, you know, how do you
define nonsense? Is it just randomness? It's seen as...
This is drifting into the question about intelligence and other things, but
I really like that. I really like that. How do you...
How do we generate systems as
a people's of what is considered valuable?
So it goes into other... But I sort of close out with the eyeballs.
I mean, do you think that, do you not reckon that our eyeballs,
like a set of eyeballs, let's forget about ours, could have evolved
very differently in a methane-rich atmosphere?
And if our atmosphere did not have the diffractive properties that it did,
that provided the basis for
our eyeballs to have the range, and they optimized for that, right?
So could you contemplate that you could have
eyeballs that are optimized for methane-rich?
Absolutely. What I would say is, the argument I meant to make before
is that I don't need to know the history, but I certainly need to know the environment.
And that's really what Darwin's all about. It's a matching to an environment.
And so if you... Environment is totally different. Let's say it's black and dark
like at the bottom of the ocean, then eyeballs wouldn't make any sense at all. I would spend a lot
of energy on stuff that wouldn't be relevant. But if you...
The history... So this issue of eyeballs versus not eyeballs has
also come up a lot in sort of evolution and intelligent design
debates of, it's a complex system, and how could you get a
complex system unless there were some hand in the making of it all and so forth?
But if you look at the history of the
sort of early organisms like snails and mollusks and so on,
what you see is a pretty nice story, whether it's true or not, we never know.
But it's a nice story, and that is that in the earliest mollusks,
what you see is a flat row of cells where some of them
are a little bit more light sensitive. And that gives you some
value. Then if you go further down the evolutionary
tree, what you see is it's curved a little bit. That row of cells is now not flat anymore,
it's curved, and in that way it turns out you can collect light.
Then you get a pinhole, you keep going further down the tree, you get a pinhole, then you get a
lens, then you get a complicated eye. So you can sort of see what's going on here.
It's detecting light, and it's trying to get finer and finer resolution in that
way. But I totally agree with you. I think
biologists often speak of genotype to phenotype,
which means our DNA tells everything, but it's missing
one major thing, and that is what's the environment that we're optimized for.
Just to not to, I mean, because it's such a specific example, but
I think this is true that the camera eye that we share with
Saffler Pods, it's actually evolved in marine environments.
So it's kind of like your methane environment, it already evolved
in a different environment, and now actually with the adaptation
of that, because we're walking around on the cinephus.
Right.
At one point coming back to your point, Ed, about the combinatorics.
There's been a lot of interest in these combinatorics
arguments. Some having to do with my direct
area, which is protein-fed, and they also have many degrees of freedom,
how does the protein find the right structure in a reasonable time?
It does so. When proteins fold up in microseconds in your body,
it's clearly the protein has no sense to do all this stuff.
But the question you raise a sequence based, very interesting one, I think,
because the arguments are, if I have 20 different amino acids
that are making an HV on an necklace of a protein
molecule, what is the likelihood that I would
be able to get exactly the right string of beads that would code for one of your
favorite proteins, let's say, lysosine. Typical protein is 100
or 1000 amino acids long, and if I have 20 possible
options in each position, I have 20 to the 100
is the size of the space that I would have to explore in order
to find that one protein. And so the issue
is, gee, that's essentially impossible. Probabilities 0, 1 over
20 to the 100 is 10 to the minus 130. That would never
happen. And over the years what we've found though
is that what matters is mechanism. And so it's very much
in the monkey on a typewriter analogy. It's very much
the monkey's hitting each key independently as random, but if the monkey was
hitting keys in some poorly the way, it turns out you could do very
very much better very quickly. And in the protein case, looking at protein
sequences, how do I get lysosine? The critical question
between those who think probability is 0 and people who say
no, it could happen. The critical issue is
how do we ask the probability question? What is the probability
of getting the sequence of lysosine? That's one question? Or
what is the probability of getting any sequence that folds to the structure
of lysosine? They seem very similar, but they're 100 orders
of magnitude different in the answer that you get. And so
mechanism-wise, what's been found is that yes
we have a 20-letter code today. We have 20 amino acids that could go here or here
or here. But what's relevant for figuring out
how the protein folds and then how it functions is just a binary
code. It's some amino acids, half the amino acids are oily
and they don't like water so they belong together and the other half are not so
oily. So you have blue and red beads instead of 20 different types of
beads. So if I have 2 to the 100 and 20 to the 100,
already I've just disappeared 100 orders of magnitude
of the problem right there. And there's now some experience that indicate
that something like that is roughly right. I mean it seems to me
again on our question of life at the universe that there's
sort of two basic possibilities and
places in between them. But at the extreme it's that the monkeys
are completely random. And at the other extreme there's some
deterministic sequence of chemical reactions
that puts together just the molecules that
we need to get life started, which sort of sounds
scary in a way because it means life scary and
from a sort of scientist point of view and that it somehow would imply that the
existence of life was built into the basic laws of chemistry
and physics. If that were the case though
then we would very likely I think have tons of life out there in the universe
because it looks like there we have tons of environments.
I mean 20, 25 years ago we couldn't have, but we didn't know
anything much about exoplanets. It could have done there was no life because there was
no one suitable environment but we're pretty sure there are plenty of suitable
environments. So if it's a deterministic process you know we're off to
a Star Wars universe so to speak. Where every planet has
something interesting going on from biology point to many planets.
Of course it could also be somewhere in between where there's
many you know it's just like the monkeys don't have to type exactly
that song that there are many song that's that could have been written and maybe there's enough of them
that it's fairly common. But you know between those
two extremes you get an empty universe or a full universe
and I think based on what we know now and I'm no biologist
I'm sure you know better but it's at least conceivable that it's sort of
anywhere in between life could be quite common
you know slightly common quite rare. It's
very important in science to keep track of what you don't know and I think
despite the fact that I think popular belief is that there's probably quite a bit of life
in the universe and there's certainly a lot of popular
interest in that Dennis may be able to say more about that than the rest of us
but you know it's we really don't know the answer
I would say at this point. Right there's a lot of room between the impossible and the inevitable
and I think if you're setting that simply better than that.
And I think in in chemistry and biology for example
a lot of the issue is how long does it take
so things that can be pretty close to the impossible
and can still happen if you have enough little agents
and this is one of the great things about biology is you have cells everywhere and bacteria everywhere
organisms everywhere and so in Darwinian
processes it also matters just how many attempts you're making and if you just
got a huge population and you've got a long enough time
you can sooner or later get there and I mean like
I don't think it was supposed to inevitable because it certainly took a
long time to develop it here on earth as far as anybody can tell
I guess you all mean no better than I do but it seems like it was about four billion years ago.
It depends on what your clock is with much shorter and much longer.
If you start with Earth being about four billion years old
we have like five three point five billion
single cells and then another billion later we had multi cells
and so on. He takes that half a billion years is not
quick I think so it's clearly not something that just happens
like instantly I think. Especially since there's a selection effect
we had to be on one of the planets where it happened otherwise we wouldn't be here
right.
I think we've said that half a billion years doesn't sound like such a short
time. Think about cosmology.
Well one question I have is what would it take
anybody here to convince anybody here that they had
found life someplace else. I mean how hostage
are we to the our conceptions of it
that we have? I mean how would you know what signal from
another actual planet would actually convince you they were generally there.
I mean this is something that a lot of discussion has taken place
in recent years and it's interesting just you're looking at
how different scientific disciplines approach this. So for example
astronomers who are looking at exoplanets and hoping in the near
future to be able to get slightly more sophisticated data about planets
that may or may not resemble the Earth tend to talk about bio signatures
but often just yeah so
bio signatures covers a number of things so one potential bio signature is
what life might do to the chemistry of a planet in particular
the atmosphere.
And so the idea is with future telescopes we may be able to
probe using light filtered through the atmospheres of those planets we may
be able to see whether there are things like oxygen or water, CO2,
or the conceivable even methane and so on all of which we
think may have an association with biosphere based largely on what's happening
here on Earth. So that's a very simplistic
approach though and already even before we've done it
we're sort of running into problems with it. So for example
in the last couple of years a planetary scientist
and astronomers who are interested in this question have begun to recognize
that you could actually have in a number of circumstances a rocky planet
that has an oxygenated atmosphere but no life. The oxygen
comes from combination of chemistry that happens in
the atmosphere itself the breakdown of molecules like water or CO2
by ultraviolet photons and depending on the kind of surface chemistry
you have that may or may not get mocked up by the surface of the planet
so you can actually produce a planet with an oxygen rich atmosphere
with no biosphere whatsoever. So then of course you say well
you've got to look for the other signature molecules and build up a story
and so that's a, you know, I think that's a very
sound terrible because I'm an astronomer it's a naive way of doing things
I think part of what you're asking is a much deeper question
which is perhaps more relevant to looking for life on Mars for example
and that's been a topic of discussion. You know the ideal thing would be something
to crawl past your microscope and wave at you and
look familiar. Oh, Shakespeare. That would be
quite a thing if it was dragging a
typewriter and I'm going to give it a...
and then yeah so then there's all this discussion, you know, it comes back to
actually something you raise which is what is life and
maybe you disagree with this but my impression after talking to lots of people over the last
few years about this is within science there's a hundred different
definitions that people point to as their sort of favorite
way of encapsulating the idea of this thing we call living system
some people point to reproduction or you know imperfect
reproduction right in order to have Darwinian selection or
metabolism or entropy as some gauge of what's going
on and it's... I mean actually I'd be interested
to hear people's thoughts on why it's difficult to
come up with that answer you know because it speaks
directly to recognizing life. Yeah. We think that we're alive
I mean I think I know that. I could be wrong.
Well people sometimes say you know the huge fundamental human question
that astrobiology abresses is are we alone
but I think the number two question almost is important
is how different or alike if we're not alone
how you know are we unusual or not
and I think that question
the first question I would say is even easier because we could search
but until we find something the second question is really impossible it's as though you wanted to
study I don't know dogs and you've only ever seen one dog
and so then you don't know
what properties this dog has
or specific to that individual dog or to that breed of dogs
or to dogs in general and you know you're just lost
Yeah it's hard to extract dogmas
especially without a fundamental
first principles understanding you know like biology is like
that's a dog and modern biology is like that's a dog's genome
but we're not you know at the level of being able to answer
questions of like defining life at a fundamental level
it's a little like my colleagues Chris Trig
natural philosophers as they were called in those days are alchemist
argued about what water is what makes something water
is it that you can drink it is it that does all things is that it can
freeze and boil and to steam and there were even Leonardo argued about what makes something
water or not water and there were arguments that
then you had to make sulfuric acid some thought that was a pure reform of water than seawater
because it dissolves things much better than seawater seawater is almost saturated already
with dissolved minerals so it's hard to dissolve things and
you know when the atomic theory of matter came along we have H2O the
discussion was over and new water was
so if we could ever have a discussion of I mean an understanding of life
at that sort of first principles level then we would be in a lot
better position to talk about how to look for it and what
would demonstrate it's there but I very much agree with Caleb that
discussions of detecting life on exoplanet these days
are well whistling in the dark hopeful let's say
but you know it's it looks like it will be really
hard I think it's very would be very difficult to do it with spectroscopy
I think chemical definitions and even basic biochemical
definitions are very tricky one of the classic
sort of disproves of simple arguments about what is life is
metabolizes uses oxygen reproduces and it turns out a candle flame
does that and then we're going to run into problems now with
artificial intelligence what's real and what's alive and what's not alive
I think you know if you think about people there's something
in cells for that matter there's something about purposeful behaviors but I don't
know any spectroscopic way you're ever going to see something like that
well people have talked about looking for pollution industrial pollution
quite quite seriously compounds that we cannot think
of any non-biologic that sorry we cannot think of any
non-biological way to produce it however intelligence
unfortunately even that turns out nature is really good at making things
that are unexpected so I recently heard a discussion so
chlorofluorocarbons have been held up as one example of
a technologically produced compound that has a definite
impact on a planetary environment by removing ozone in the atmosphere
but I recently heard work done people actually studying Earth's
deep past there's this giant volcanic
lava system called the deck and traps and realizing
that there's a geophysical geochemical root by which
could have produced chlorofluorocarbons all by itself you know 200 million years ago
without well without yeah without the intervention of intelligent
life so maybe pollutants aren't even a particularly
mature of any kind of life planets are quite good at polluting themselves
so I feel that we're not ever going to converge on one I think it's
all going to be as simple as H2O I think it's
well probably there'll probably be many different definitions of life
and maybe what we'll be looking for is some kind of Venn diagram
to kind of make the decision of okay is this
actually life but kind of as I started out in the beginning
you're sort of your thread of trying to define
intelligent life in terms of
information production and the
persistence of...
yeah and it also I mean it does relate to this question of looking for life
in the universe I mean rather ironically right if you found a planet that was
beaming out radio structured radio signatures on a TV show
you definitely know there's life there right we wouldn't we wouldn't be in the show
it would depend on the show and the channel
so I mean then for that reason just to mention
within my field there has been a growing interest in
resuscitation of this field of SETI of search extraterrestrial
intelligence although now we call it techno signatures because that's less of a trigger word for
the you know people's memories of what were thought to be failures in the past but actually
part of the issue with the search extraterrestrial intelligence is
we've looked so little we really have looked so little but you know that's the remarkable thing is if you got that
you would definitely unambiguously I think be able to say
that there was recognizable life on a planet and that fits into this question of yes you know the nature of
intelligent life and the information that we carry
around externally to it I mean humans are pretty peculiar
in that respect you know we carry around and propagate into
the future throughout human history back to the first you know the first exchange of a story around a campfire
Torquevard, where the cave art, Dawkins would call it you know memes, the generation of memes and those
their propagation but I think it's even more diverse than that
that is an interesting quality that we have
and of course it also but it's conferred great evolutionary advantages to us
you can write a book about you know don't eat this plant because it will kill you
and a hundred years later someone will read that book and it will save their life
so there's a certain advantage to be able to store this information
but it comes at a cost there's an energetic burden to it
so what is the current status of the SETI like funding and programs
I mean I know that in the 1980s it was federally funded
it died in the 1990s
what is the status?
Dennis do you want to say something?
I don't think there's ever since I think 1992 when
they pulled the plug on SETI but there's been any federal funding
for actual radio searches
but there was private funding?
there's private funding, there's this SETI Institute which was
do all the SETI scientists said okay we're going to raise our own money
and they're quite successful and they you know Paul Allen built this
big array of radio tales for them in Northern California
and now they have Yuri Milner who's like spending
$2 leasing telescopes and wants to send an iPhone to Alpha Centauri
which is an amazing idea but
8 is involved in that.
Yeah, big idea lies in the morning of the Breakthrough Initiative
such as the iPhone to the Stars Project I should say
the Breakthrough Foundation which is Yuri Milner's Foundation funding of SETI
is a separate initiative of both the connection to some of the people in life
and is spending $100 million over 10 years
which I think is the current rate of spending on SETI
and it's basically a classical radio SETI looking for
signals from radio signals that I'll
buy Q2 to extraterrestrial civilization is probably the highest rate of
spending on SETI that we have ever had in history
and is in the design of that experiment is to
what Kayla mentioned that we hadn't looked very much.
The goal of that is called Breakthrough Listen
everything is called Breakthrough Something in that world.
So Breakthrough Listen's goal is to expand the volume of face-space frequencies
and sensitivities and so on by about a factor of a thousand over what's been done before
so however little we have looked so far the goal is to look a thousand times more
by the time this is done it started a few years ago so
I don't remember exactly when we probably have another six or seven years before
the project.
And a lot of people were...
But that's still a tiny fraction of the galaxy even when they've...
Right.
You can look on that housing amplification.
Yeah that's certainly true. It is very hard to prove something isn't there.
Almost no matter how much you've looked you could
always look much more because you can look for arbitrarily small
signals you can look at different wavelengths.
I don't think I'll be talking too much out of school to say that you really ask me for advice
on how to spend money on a steady search
and I should imagine that he took none of my advice
which is probably why he has so much advice.
But there's a lot of possible ways of looking that are not just searching for radio signals.
Right it's still very anthropocentric right I want to come back to that so
I remember mentioning to Keilemun Mime last time that there's a book
written in 1864 by Camille Flamiro.
It's called Lumen and it's imaginative.
It's about a planet where you have sentient plants
that digest and eat and breathe and speak to each other
in a tongue that we wouldn't understand.
So I mean all these ideas were looking for radio signals
very tied to very anthropomorphic view of life.
So how do we expand?
Well I think, yeah no so you're absolutely right and it's also extremely skewed
in terms of you think about the history of life on earth.
For most of the history of life on earth there would be no techno signatures whatsoever.
It would all be chemistry or colours or other variations on the planet.
So in that sense it's already almost stacking the odds against it.
If our planet is in some way representative of how evolution plays out
we obviously don't know that.
The fact that technological beings have only existed for maybe the last 100,000 years
we have really no idea whether that's the norm
or whether that's some extreme.
So I think you're absolutely right and this is one of the
in that whole field.
It's very very challenging as well.
People always I think fall into the trap of the well a species would do this wouldn't it?
Which is completely skewed towards our own and it's usually skewed to
you know Western European ways of thinking about the world anyway.
And that is problematic and I'm not sure we...
Well it's limiting, it's severely limiting.
Incredibly limiting.
But the problem with not doing that, you know it's like the old things looking for your keys
under the light post.
If you don't look for something that's like us, you don't know, you know,
Yogi Berra said if you don't know where you're going you may not get there.
You may not find it.
And I think we've seen a recent example of that in discussions of the interstellar small body
that passed through the solar system back in late 2017.
Um, the name was given.
It has a number of puzzling properties and the idea has been put forward that it was some piece of alien
artifact, you know, some sort of spacecraft or space debris of some interstellar
traveling culture.
And I mean it couldn't be but the problem with the hypothesis like that,
the problem of just looking for a civilization that's not like us,
is that it has too much explanatory and not excessive explanatory and insufficient
predictive power.
You can explain anything and predict nothing.
Because we know nothing about their capabilities or motives and, you know,
no matter what happens you could always say, well that's because the aliens wanted to do this
or wanted to fool us or do something.
And, you know, it could be but it's very hard to engage that hypothesis in a scientific way.
It doesn't mean it isn't true but it's just hard to do anything with it.
I mean I think the one positive thing about, for example, the Umu Amua work and particularly
some of these interpretations or analyses that suggest,
maybe it was a, you know, a solar sail or a light sail or something like that.
The one positive element of all of that discussion I think is that, you know,
sort of in Bayesian terms, instead of setting the prior to zero possibility that something
unusual might have a relationship to intelligence or others be, to give it a little leeway.
You know, it's not zero. It's not one. It's some tiny, tiny number.
And that to me is very interesting because we haven't really done that before, right?
We've tended to say, well, that's such, we just don't think that's going to be a good
possibility, which it comes means, again, if you never look, if you never allow it to be one
of the possibilities you'll never see it if it actually shows up.
So that's the one positive I think came out of that.
I'm very sinned and fledding.
I mean, one for all for speculation and, you know, playing with one's imagination
and expanding the possibilities, right?
So one other thing that's always kind of puzzled me is, you know,
Stephen G. Gould has famously said that, you know, if we rewind the tape of evolution on Earth,
you might not end up with us, right?
So this, the role of randomness in evolution, is there anything more?
We can milk, I'm just saying, well, those random sort of circumstances.
Is there, are there people doing experiments like if one, something along the sequence
that we now understand quite well was different, what could we end up with?
Are there simulations curious of...
So I think one thing that is becoming clear now, especially in cell experiments,
where you can replay the tape, you can keep running it, take the same set of cells,
you can do all this in the laboratory.
It's not like watching zebras over, you know, thousands of years and so on.
And that's a very big focus these days of evolutionary studies as well,
because you can work so quickly and see so much.
And the answer there seems to be, replaying the tape,
gives you whatever answer you should get based on the environment you end up in.
So as opposed to saying, I can tell you exactly the root this took, usually you can't do that,
but you can say, if you're ending up in an environment that has the following,
then it's going to succeed in the same ways it does now, more or less,
with some variation.
And so largely it seems to be, if you replay the tape, until to the same endpoint,
then you're going to get the same result.
But it's like knowing...
So coming back to my methane atmosphere, so if you run your simulation and say,
well, you're stuck in a habitat that is going to be methane rich,
then what happens?
We can play that game now, right, with the cells.
Here's what I want to do if I live in methane.
But if you said, so here's the sort of root issue.
Suppose I said, I'm going to live in methane for a little while,
and then I'm going to live in an oxygen and nitrogen atmosphere like we do.
And then you said, okay, I'm going to play the tape differently though.
I'm going to swap it, and I'm going to do just the opposite.
First, I'm going to live in this one, then this one,
but then I'm going to come back to this one so that my endpoint is exactly the same,
but now I went through a totally different root.
Then the answer at the moment seems to be it only matters what the endpoint is,
not how you got there.
And often evolution does seem to take all the roots it can.
One thing that the modelers, you mentioned modeling,
one of the things that modelers have often found is if you work in very high-dimensional spaces,
and these are all high-dimensional spaces, because there's spaces of,
I could make this mutation at this time, then this mutation, at that time,
I have a whole lot of different mutations, a lot of different times.
I could take all kinds of different roots.
It's like traveling from San Francisco to New York.
I got all kinds of ways I go through Dallas, or I go through Chicago,
I go this way, or I go whatever.
I got all these different roots.
And the thing is, I can't tell.
I can't tell anything.
When I see the car in New York City, I don't have any idea where it came from.
So I think that the rule of thumb seems to be
in these high-dimensional spaces, it turns out pretty much always easy to get from some point
to some other point, but you can't tell what that root was.
Presumably, as well, thinking in sort of practical, tangible terms,
when we say, oh, the environment is methane environment or toxin rich,
there are many other aspects to any given natural environment
that may have a subtle or not subtle influence on what's been going on.
In a laboratory condition, maybe you do have that case of,
you always end up kind of looking the same, but in a more realistic environment,
there will be differences at some level because of the complexity of the environment itself,
I would imagine.
Absolutely, and this is really interesting,
because this has been a huge puzzle.
One of the grand puzzles really of Darwinian evolution is
the idea of normal evolution is winner takes all.
If I have an environment and this beast can take better advantage of living in that environment
than this one can, this beast wins and that beast loses and you never see this beast again
and you only see this beast, winner take all.
But if that's true, how do you explain all the diversity of life?
That we see today.
This is very difficult to explain, and so this comes down, I think,
the answer sort of is shaping up to be something along the lines of exactly what you just said,
and that is sure, if I am a cell, I care about sugar, I want my glucose or something,
I need my food, but I also care about other stuff in the environment,
and all of those things can be coming in at all kinds of different levels,
and so ninjas are sort of everywhere, and you could think about this in a sort of a corporate world too.
You know, it's amazing how many different kinds of Kleenexes there are toothpaste or something like that.
You know, somehow there's a niche for everybody, they seem to be able to survive.
I've thought about that, and it always seemed to me that this idea of survival of the fittest isn't quite right,
it's more like survival of the fit enough.
I mean, it's good for all of us.
So it's evolution is sort of a tautology, it says what persists.
So any species or creature, well, not a single creature, but any sequence of ancestry that does well enough not to be extinguished is still here.
I mean, it's again sort of circular, tautological, and certainly niches help with that,
but even in the absence of niches, even in exactly the same environment,
you can have quite a bit of diversity of things flourishing, you know, to the rainforest,
and there's not one kind of tree or one kind of beetle, there's an insane number.
But let me inject slightly to your point about survival of the survivors.
This has certainly been an objection to evolution of, well, how would I define fitness in the first place if it's anything different than just surviving?
You know, is there anything there besides just being a tautology?
You know, you survive if you survive.
But the classic case that argues that there really is something more to it than that was in early 1800s England,
because there was a moth called the peppered moth, and in the old days in England, the trees were fairly white with speckles,
and the moths ended up, they were fairly white with speckles, and so the birds didn't see them, they'd land on the trees, and the birds didn't see them.
But then from the early 1800s, so the middle 1800s, the industrial revolution happened in England, and there was soot everywhere,
and the trees turned black from soot, and what happened was the moths that evolved were black,
so the peppered moths were still around, the black moths were there, but the peppered moths were the ones that all got picked off by the birds then.
So the argument about survival to fit is what it comes down to in a case like this is survival.
I think the wording is not great, because it really does sort of point you in that direction, point all of us in that direction.
But survival is a property of the whole population, and I want my lineage to survive.
But fitness is a property of the individual, and so here's a case where the population ultimately survives,
you know, various moths are going to get picked off and not picked off, black ones and peppered ones and so on by the birds.
But on average, the individuals that survive more are going to be the black ones, and so you can say,
well, blackness is what fitness is all about in this case, I have a mechanism that's the individual thing,
and then the individual thing propagates to the population.
So I think probably if Darwin recognized that this was going to be a problem, he could have,
or somebody could have figured out a different way of saying it that doesn't make it sound too tautological.
Otherwise it's too convergent.
Yeah, yeah. Absolutely.
I'm not contingent enough, right? Yeah.
Yeah, and it doesn't give you a sense of sort of what models, you know, what's the mechanism underlying any of these things.
So that's, I mean, coming back to, I guess we're supposed to be talking about life in the universe, that suggests then, right?
But one thing we could say about life elsewhere is there will not be a planet of all where only life is a single type of organism with identical structure,
because that is not how any of this works, and that's going to be a universal truth.
Yes.
But there should be diversity anywhere. Yes. It would be comforting exactly what kind of diversity.
Yes, and it makes us worry a lot as we lose diversity these days.
Another related to that is the point about diversity in early origins, and there's a sense that, in the old days,
there was sort of the sense that, well, somehow or another, some cells arose and they got competitive with some other cells,
and the cell lineages were already competing with each other because that's sort of the fundamental feature of biology is the Darwinian thing about competing and so forth.
But there's this view now, this guy Nigel Gold, of Illinois, and this view, very interesting, and I think it's very sensible,
and that is that the way life emerged was not, you know, your family competing against my family and so on, among all the animals and species and so on.
It was this big soup of proteins and nucleic acids, and it was sort of like one organism, and the separation out into individual lineages didn't happen too much later.
And it's interesting because you see this reflected in bacteria, there's a thing called horizontal gene transfer, and bacteria,
so Darwin's tree of evolution says, you know, I came from my parents and my parents came from their parents and all this stuff, and so it's like a tree all the way down.
But the thing that bacteria do is they violate this tree in a big time way because they just cross over here, they just pass their genes over to anybody who wants them,
and the genes get passed around, that's called horizontal gene transfer.
That stuff happens all the time, it happens in us too, we got cells, most of ten times more cells are bacteria in us than are us cells, and they're not good.
It's in a microbiome.
Yeah, so it's a microbiome.
And those cells are doing this kind of swapping all the time.
It was modern technology pushing medicine towards that direction.
Very much, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
Direct transfer again, yeah.
There's a lot of activity going on right now in the microbiology world to try to figure out the microbiome, and how much does your gut have to do with your health?
And, gee, could I reconfigure your gut if you're not healthy and things of that type?
The difficulty with it is it's way harder than studying a single kind of cell because you're studying an entire ecosystem, and everybody in there is sort of
they've got their neighborhoods and their communities, and it's like New York City when it's in your gut.
You know, it's complicated.
There's also been a lot of debate about the microbiome and humans or any organism that has a microbiome, and, you know, Darwinian selection in terms of this idea of the hollow-biant.
So, you know, the microbes in you, what their interests are, what they want or need may be different at some level than what you need.
And so when you look at a human being, what...
This is a big philosophical question.
I mean, so when a micro-biome is not you, I mean, I would think it would be you.
No, no, this is purely from a sort of Darwinian fitness point of view, right?
When you look at a human, when I look at Dennis, I evaluate your evolutionary fitness in terms of your cells and what you're doing, or your microbiome, or the combination of that.
And I know some people have been saying that the selectable quantity is actually the interaction of all these things in some sort of abstract sense, which is very, very fascinating to me.
Because that's sort of moving away to a different sort of definition of complex life that's not...
Selectability can be really complicated.
And one of the things that's of great interest right now is that we make these things...
They're mathematical things, and they're called fitness landscapes, and they look like hills.
And what they're supposed to represent is that organisms that are more fit are higher up the hill, and organisms that are less fit are lower down the hill.
And so these are just sort of simple mathematical cartoony kind of representations of that idea.
So the idea is, okay, let's see if I weaken figure out what kind of organism is more fit than what other organisms are.
Here's the problem with that, and this is what's kind of new and really interesting.
That's not the whole story.
There's another thing that people are calling the Red Queen hypothesis.
What that amounts to is, also you have predator prey relations.
It's not just about me fitting my environment, just an individual, and that individual's personal fitness or the lineage for that environment.
It's the environment.
It's the environment interacting with everybody.
And so the predator prey thing is, let's say I'm the prey, and you're the predator, and we're both sitting at some level on this fitness landscape.
You're equally fit, and I'm equally fit, or whatever.
And now you start chasing me, but you're chasing me around certain changes that can be made biochemically in me that have nothing to do with changing my fitness, improving it or making it worse.
Or you either. It's just you're chasing me, and so you get better at capturing me, and then my genome evolves, and I get better at avoiding you, and then you get better at catching me again, and I get better at avoiding you.
And it turns out we're running around this hillside, never making it any further up.
But we have to do this, because this is part of evolution, too.
And it makes everything even more complicated than it was.
We've talked a lot about evolution, and I want to suggest some of it via a value just to be imaginative.
So let's try to imagine a life form or a life on the planet, where evolution isn't really a major factor, it doesn't work very well.
And let me motivate this by saying, I think people are kind of a little hand-wavy and vague about what evolution requires, because they are well.
And we just have to have self-replication going, and then we'll get selection, and we'll have evolution.
But really there's a lot of factors. You have to have a flexible way of storing information.
It has to express that information, it has to be expressed some way, otherwise there's no selection on it.
It has to make accurate copies, but not too accurate, otherwise there won't be any mutations or changes.
But it has to be accurate enough that you're not forgetting information faster than you're generating it.
And the errors that you make have to be non-deterministic, otherwise you'll always go in the same direction.
So they have to, in some sense, be stochastic or random, so you can explore this whole landscape of different fitnesses.
And there was one other. Oh, yeah, and you have to have all this text energy.
You have to have a stable metabolism to drive it.
So all of this fooling around with the information content has to go on without destroying your ability to make copies,
either through metabolism or destroying the copy mechanism.
So there's quite a set of fairly complicated requirements for evolution to occur the way it does on Earth.
And obviously, we do have those mechanisms here, and it's played as our discussion has illustrated a dominant role in determining what life is like on the Earth.
But there might be systems made even out of the same beads on the basic biochemistry, which don't satisfy all of those things.
And so you can have life and some of the things, some of those factors, but it just doesn't evolve very well.
I can think of that might lead to just the confidence.
So those kinds of simulations would be just fantastic.
So there you might find a planet which only has one type of life or something.
Well, what it made me think of, and it's sort of jumping forward a bit, it's almost a very science fictiony idea.
It was an outrageous idea, so I'll say that.
And it's not a reason, but it's still in principle something that would happen, sort of naturally.
Imagine a species, a sophisticated species, a sort of technological species,
decides it does not want to evolve anymore.
Right?
Just says no, because I mean, this is always comes up when we talk about interstellar travel and moving around the galaxy.
The truth is, by the time you end up on the other side of the galaxy, you're going to be a different biological entity because of evolution.
But suppose some species decides it doesn't want to do that.
So what it does is it says, okay, there's no more biological reproduction.
We're going to build a machine and it's just going to pop out clones on demand.
Then you'll have a lifetime and you'll die and then you'll be buried, but you're not reproducing biologically.
And now so the question is, assuming the environment is stable, I mean, that could conceivably exist.
Right?
And it's a sort of rational decision.
Right? I kind of like us to all stay the same way.
I don't want to end up with tentacles or whatever a billion years time.
So that could, I know that sounds like it's an artificial thing, but it's not, right?
It's an evolution to the point where you make that decision.
Sounds going to be boring.
I'm sorry?
It sounds kind of boring.
Yeah, I mean, sure.
Maybe it's an unimaginable species.
You don't want to get it checked from their line.
It's sex with reproduction, so you could still, you know.
So there's a, you know, it would require an arrogant and narcissist species.
I wonder where we could find one.
Yeah.
How far we have to look to find one.
So there are examples of exactly what you're talking about.
Andrew Murray at Harvard has done a really interesting experiment.
And it turns out if his cells live in a very fixed environment and they never change,
they just start jettying all kinds of stuff that has to do with evolution.
So there's this notion of the evolution of evolvability.
And so the sense is that certain organisms, if you're in a very fluctuating environment,
you have a lot of machinery to be able to sort of handle all of those fluctuations.
But if you're in an environment that's very fixed, then you can throw a lot of that stuff away
and you don't need to evolve.
But then, of course, the problem is you're really brittle.
If all of a sudden, someday, global warming or something comes along and just changes slightly,
what your environment looks like?
Bang, you're kind of all, your whole population's dead.
I also want us to think a little bit about, it's quite possible that a species might actually not have the curiosity
to go seek out other species, right?
That's another part of the answer of a more perfect view that we carry around.
There could be sort of a more content species that has somehow learned to live better with his environment than we have.
Well, there are humans that people now, humans, who said don't go looking for aliens.
They're going to come and eat us or some kind of slave us.
That's a view that people vow hold.
Or that's one view, but there are also people who think we shouldn't be spending all this money on space travel
or space rides or colonizing Mars or whatever else.
And that maybe we should save our planet, we should eradicate diseases here, and learn to live better in a better harmony.
Or we're hardly spending any money on those things.
It doesn't even make a mark in the federal budget really.
We're not spending money on either of those things.
It feels like it's people object to the attention being given to these things.
I mean, as you say, they matter to actual money.
It's not so much the money, it's about the sentiment.
Yeah, they're very interesting.
So I'm just to be devil's advocate, because I basically agree with you, but in the big picture, the earth will not stay.
In a condition that is good for us.
And that could happen on timescale.
A hundred thousand years, it could happen on timescale.
A million years, whatever.
Irrespective of how green we become and careful we become.
So there is this bigger level question of, you know, and this is one of the excuses someone like,
our Musk uses for going to Mars, well, you know, it's a backup plan.
It's a really long-term picture.
The earth like any planet.
It's good for us now.
In fact, it's been in a period that has enabled humans to emerge.
And it hasn't always been like that at all.
And it won't be like that again, the future, no matter what we do.
So I just wonder, I mean, the difficulty with that, it's really long-term planning.
It's interesting from an evolution.
From an evolutionary point of view because there is fundamental mismatch in the kinds of timescales
on which we have evolved and the timescales.
Perhaps it's the contrast between evolutionary timescales and our lifespan.
Maybe that's what it is, that is making us such short-termy folks.
Well, I mean, once you start thinking down those sorts of avenues,
and maybe this is relevant to one of your future roundtables about the Anthropocene planet.
Because we've paid or disliked or tried to avoid death and, you know, at an individual lifetime level,
we sort of conceive that wise behavior for our species, for public policy,
would be to resist changes in the environment.
You know, there's even this idea called, what's it called, Gaia,
that the biosphere in general tries to stabilize the environment.
I don't actually see any evidence at all for that in my opinion.
But would that even be a good thing?
And, you know, there's this view that, you know, what do they call them?
Would most of the species die out? I've lost the phrase.
Mass extinction?
Mass extinction, right.
There's the idea that mass extinctions are, you know, that there might be one coming
from either human causes or other causes, and we'd better do something about it.
But we wouldn't be here where they're not mass extinctions in the past,
and indeed, you know, the whole history of life, which we're so fond of,
not only because it led to us, but because it led to them.
The difference is that the difference compared to previous mass extinctions
and are being here is the accelerating lever arm that human activity has provided, right?
And so this might be a mass extinction from which we may not recover at all.
Right, and we may not. Something probably will help.
And it does seem to be going fast, but I'm not sure it's faster than, you know,
the asteroid that crashed down.
Who says that humans have to survive anyway?
Exactly.
Anyway, I mean, we're going to have our turn and we're going to be gone.
I mean, a far more wonderful species could go along in the space less by us
that has these traits of, you know, deep thought and tranquility and we have to get out of the way.
I mean, we just don't know.
Or maybe not, or just our iPhones floating through the gallantry.
There's an experiment in cells that proves your point and it has to do with time constants.
You know, what's my lifetime span versus when am I likely to see my next mass extinction
or big devastating event or something?
You can do this in cells and it turns out what you do is you put drugs in and cells don't like drugs.
These are ones that knock the cells out.
So you put drugs in and you do it sort of periodically.
And if you do it sort of on a time scale where the cell says, okay, now time is fine.
Okay, now I'm getting hit by drug and back and forth and so forth.
Then the cell develops these resistance mechanisms.
On the other hand, if the time constant is pretty slow over the population time,
they just jettison that stuff.
They don't need it anymore.
And I suspect maybe we're a product of that too.
The difference, of course, it's argued to answer my own question is
we have four sides about the future that presumably cells don't have.
Yeah, imprintable.
So if we cause a mass extinction, it may be feeble compared to the one that was caused by the great ox,
you know, when the photosynthesis changed the atmosphere to an oxygen one,
but presumably the organisms that gave off all that oxygen didn't have any way of evaluating what its impact would be
in the future.
I don't know, responsibility or...
That's a great question for me.
So where is this foresight?
Because we're all made of cells.
The great question for me.
The cell in my body knows the future.
And you have somehow, I think I know the future.
Where is that?
This collective intelligence somehow, right?
Does it just mean, or do I know in your relationship that everybody wrote on this table?
Well, actually I do know a lot of it in relation to the people around this table, because they're my sources.
But...
Is that me?
No, no.
Maybe it was the aliens.
Heaves dropping.
Come and say that.
Pretty asked a question earlier, or made a comment earlier about maybe these other life forms nonsense to us as important to them.
So quick.
So that would raise the challenge.
How would we ever find such life forms if they were interested in what we would call nonsense?
Would they be discoverable even to us?
Yeah, I mean that relates to also, there's a thing in the discussion of SETI and the efficiency of transmitting information between stars and also keeping it secure.
And so, I think actually this bizarrely enough came up in some conversation somebody had with Edward Snowden.
I was going to say, or a calendar, for example, I can imagine.
So this idea that perfectly encrypted high efficiency data is indistinguishable from noise.
So the aliens talking to each other across the cosmos, we might not...
Even pick it up.
Is there any sort of structured information? It's just more cosmic hiss.
I know that's not quite what you were talking about, but it triggered that thought in my head.
Okay.
I'll open it up for questions from the audience.
I don't think you were on.
Okay.
And yeah, we're open for questions from the audience.
Please ask questions and note on guns.
Okay, this is not a question, but a few observations directed primarily to Dr. Dhill.
And then anyone else if you allow the time, which is unlikely.
So, one...
No, that I reject.
One minute.
That's a good question.
All right, so in terms of the two factors that I've really noticed are, of course, that of anthropomorphism and that of imagination.
So I'm going to give examples of why this is more important than it may not be apparent to some.
A few years ago, a couple of scientists took a mathematical model of Darwinism in order to try to answer the question,
what is the benefit that death gives?
And long story short, it was discovered that for a particular group, not a whole species, but for a group,
the food resources that are available on a generation by generation basis,
extends or diminishes life expectancy.
So that is the value is not for the current generation, but for the next.
So that's one thing.
In terms of SETI and radio communications, we're a very young species.
Radio waves are the beginning.
Again, relatively recently, counterfactual entanglement allows entanglement between particles that never have to interact.
And it's also secure without using a non-quantum key, which means that if there are anything like us,
except hopefully they've been around longer, a billion years, a hundred thousand years,
they may be using counterfactual communications, which in fact has been already demonstrated in the laboratory.
And if they're a little bit like us and didn't destroy their own planet and they're there,
it may well be the case that they are making assumptions that we also are using quantum communications of that nature,
which is why we're not hearing a damn thing.
We're not there yet. It's still in the lens.
So I'll just finish with why I'm motivated by it as Einstein.
Imagination is important in knowledge because knowledge is limited, but imagination encompasses the entire universe.
And that also engages not just space, but time.
In other words, the use of imagination to look at potential futures is not only wonderful, but necessary.
Maybe I would just say the beginning that it was shut up.
I already said it wasn't a question.
So I just wanted our response from yourself.
I think I wanted to say something.
Just very, very briefly, I would say that many of the more thoughtful people in the SETI community have long
admitted that our best chance of hearing from classical radio SETI would be if our punitive,
expectarrestrial civilization was sending signals intended to be easy for us to pick up and understand.
One thing is wanting to make contact. That's why I married that point earlier.
Rather than us eavesdropping on something they intended for each other or whatever.
And I can comment on your first point, which has to do with longevity and energy investment.
If you look across species, you see exactly that, that some species live quite a long time and others live
in much shorter time. A lot of this has to do with when do you have babies?
And so if your physiology is such that you have babies early and your life span, you will die early.
So you're just needed long enough to have babies and then after that you're not anymore.
And so for example, we can compare us to species like one that's called the naked mole rat,
which turns out to just live a very long time, for example.
And what you discover is that evolution could have, if we look at them, these other species.
Evolution could have designed us differently. We could have lived a lot longer.
But we didn't because this is how long it takes for us to have kids.
Thank you.
Before I ask my question, I'll just comment on the SETI project.
I have a background in electrical engineering.
Electromagnetic waves are a very inefficient form of communication. They do not penetrate solid objects
or electromagnetic objects like stars. So more likely means that communication would be either what the gentleman mentioned,
quantum communications, entanglement, or neutrino communications, which, you know, we have no technology that I'm aware of
to use neutrino communications.
But my point, you know, the entire supposition that there is extraterrestrial life of any form,
let alone technological life like us, is based on probabilities.
And the probability of our having evolved on this planet with perfect conditions for us to have evolved
is still practically zero. And it took us one third of the life of the universe for us to evolve, to be technological beings.
If you change one single factor in our evolutionary course, if, you know, if the asteroid had not hit the Yucatan 65 million years ago,
the dinosaurs would certainly, mammals would not be ruling the planet. Reptiles probably would be.
And I don't think they would be broadcasting sitcoms to cosmic evil.
They would be broadcasting the equivalent of dinosaurs' sitcoms, dinosaur communications.
But again, another technological civilization if it existed probably wouldn't know where to look, which is what
we discussed before. But let me see if I remember my question.
My question is, since it took us one third of the life of the known universe for us to evolve,
an extremely unlikely evolution, does anybody believe that in the short 14 billion years that our visible universe has existed,
that there would be a replication of that evolution or anything comparable to it?
Well, there's an interesting story.
Probability is probably just too low.
But we have no idea.
Can I just say you're making an awful lot of assumptions, including that we have any idea what the probability is that we're here.
I mean, Ed might want to comment on that. Ed has written beautiful papers about this.
The level of ignorance is extreme.
We know somewhat the probability of our own evolution, because we know what the steps were.
I wouldn't.
And they were trillions and trillions and trillions of improbable steps.
But this is a change of single one.
Yeah, I see your point, but it's all about interpreting things after the fact.
I would say our probability of a replication of evolution to a technological civilization within the short 14 billion years.
I would disagree, because I think that given that unless you think we started on Mars, the probability that we evolved on Earth is one.
We're here.
Right?
That's one data.
Yeah, that's there's no evidence that anybody else is here.
So I can tell you an interesting story.
This is back in 1972-73, Francis Crick, the famous guy who discovered the double helix, worked with a guy named Leslie Orgel, and they put out this idea called directed panspermia.
The idea of panspermia had existed a long time before.
Panspermia means that life has existed in the universe before, and somehow it ended up here, but panspermia, the old idea itself, was just, hey, it's everywhere, and it landed here.
And that's why we have only one genetic code, because there was this one bottleneck, and it sort of was the thing that landed on Earth and so on.
Anyway, what Crick and Orgel did was they gave these talks, I heard one as a graduate student, and then they wrote this as a paper called directed panspermia.
And directed panspermia, the idea is, no, it's not that there's just life everywhere in the universe, it's that somebody out there is sending something straight to Earth for some purpose, and they're trying to get us going.
And those of us who were in the audience couldn't tell if these guys were, I mean, they were super first-rate scientists, both of them.
Whether this was-
Whether this was a scientific hypothesis, or whether this was a British sense of humor.
And at the end of the day, so it turns out this became quite a well-known idea, this directed panspermia thing.
In the meantime, I think now the whole scientific community has kind of dismissed it, including Crick.
Before Crick died, he then became sort of an RNA world guy.
Well, just a footnote to your comment, a footnote to history was not correctly discovered DNA.
In honor of International Women's Month, it was a Rosalind Frank.
Turn it up.
Turn it up.
One, go ahead.
Good afternoon, ma'am.
Extraordinary debate.
My name's Anthony Fimbo, by the way.
I run a company called Eagle Genomics, and we're building technology to explore the microbiome, not just the human microbiome, but the microbiome of the earth.
And I've got so many ideas, I want to try and string together in a very simplistic way.
I'm not a scientist, I'm not a astrophysicist, I'm not a biologist.
But I am a cybernetesis, and I just want to talk about the Gaia thesis, first of all, in a quasi-scientific way.
Starting by just making a bit of a contrast.
So we have most of the debate today focused on the happy accident.
Francis Crick's happy accident, never to be repeated, versus some conversation about determinism.
I don't know if anyone is familiar with Eric Smith's work, the idea that the earth is a giant battery, and that the
the citric cycle as the basis for this chemical breakdown means that life is in inevitability on this planet.
It's one idea, the second idea is to talk about the microbiome.
And that's really an anthropomorphic, anthropocentric view of the holobiant, because the soil is a microbiome fundamentally.
Plants interact with the soil, we interact with plants, etc, etc, etc.
So, I wanted to close.
So I just wanted to try and expand on the ideas of determinism, Gaia, and on the idea of the holobiant, to ask the question about whether that might get us a bit closer to understanding what life actually is.
One word answer, sure.
I think it's a good question.
So we have this tendency to think about things in isolation.
We put it in a test tube and study it, we'll understand it, but of course nothing actually lives in a test tube in the real world.
I think I see this coming up also slightly different, but in field of AI research, people talk about, oh, how do we make a general AI that is like us?
But you're doing it in a test tube, and I don't think that's ever going to work. It has to somehow be out in the complexity of the universe in order to develop more skills.
So I think, yeah, I don't really have a good answer. I'm making a comment to your question.
Yeah, absolutely. But I'm not sure how we're going to fully incorporate the enormous complexity of the entire biological system of the Earth.
Maybe one comment. There's a lot of complex systems that share a lot of features, and I think we could learn from looking at each complex system and the other.
One example of this is that Sergey Masloff some years ago was at LBL, sorry, we're having looked at software usage.
How many software packages call other software packages? And what it was a story about is that some stuff is really useful, writing a little code that adds to and to, and everybody uses that, and then there's other codes that are more complicated and so on.
Looked at the complexity of software codes. And he then, he also looked at the complexity of biochemistry, and he discovered the distribution functions of these things are identical.
And as if what we learned from the software, looking at the software, was that there's sort of swapability and there's usability and stuff that's really good and useful, you just use it as much as you can.
And there's a broader field too of what some people call explore and exploit computational modeling, where the idea is you have complexity and you're trying to search a landscape, maybe some complicated mathematical function, and you're trying to look for the,
say the mountain peak or something, and how do you find it in the most efficient possible way?
Well, what you do is you do, you have sort of two modes. One is when you think you're headed up a mountain, you just go for it, and that's the exploit part.
And when you don't quite know where you are, you're going up a little and you're going down a little, what you do is you just keep doing random things, it sort of splits into an entropy like thing and an energy like thing, but it's how Monte Carlo people
and how people who do super computing protein folding in our kind of world, for example, all kinds of things,
function in some what similar ways, they find answers in these sort of with the swapping off randomness and optimization.
And I think another example of this is industrial innovation. If you ask, so one of the examples that comes up often in origins, questions,
it comes up in origins, is chicken and egg problem, what came first, the chicken or the egg?
Well, that's a badly posed problem because chickens and eggs come up together, and so it's not, you don't get one or the other, and then boom, the egg pops open and now comes to chicken for the first time.
And if you, there's, and so this has to do with sort of the sequence of events that things can happen.
If you look at industrial innovations, very similar to this, and also the origin of evolution of the eye, for example, what's the evolution of the iPhone?
Well, you can say, well, okay, let's see, is half an iPhone, this is the argument about an eye, half an eye would be useless, therefore, there's no fitness value, therefore, it couldn't have evolved and it had to have come from some other thing.
What about half an iPhone? Well, half an iPhone, there was half an iPhone, but it's not sewing it in half, that obviously would be a useless thing.
Half an iPhone was, what happened if we, when we started back in the 1940s, we invented computers, we invented transistors, we invented GPS, we invented Internet, those were all the threads.
So half an iPhone was sort of between 1947 and now, what would it have been? It was probably, half an iPhone was probably an Apple II, and it was large-scale integrated circuits, and it was some clumsy version of an Internet, and it wasn't anything that looked like an iPhone, and it was not gold-directed.
It was not gold-directed in any way, and so I think that all of these complex systems, there are commonalities that we should be exploiting somehow or another.
I don't know how to do it, and I think your points won't very well taken though.
Yeah, I mean, I think the only sort of brief comment I have is that you're absolutely right, that probably what we need to consider are networks that facilitate life, so connections between conditions.
So it's a much more complex problem than saying whether you need oxygen or water.
I sort of would go back and thinking about the issues you raised and the issues of previous question raised, is we're a little bit back to trying to study dogs with just one example of a dog to look at.
I think Eric Spitz works on these cycles, a brilliant description of what happened on Earth. Are they relevant for what's happening on other planets?
We just don't know, I would say.
And again, we have to keep track of what we know, and we don't know, and that question number two is how different or similar are we if there is other life out there?
Is I think something that we fundamentally don't know. What are the ways we might find out?
One, which I think Ken has been talking about, is we may understand biology and what's happened on Earth, and a deeper and deeper and more systems levels so we can see the patterns that might be the same.
And of course the other is to search for life elsewhere, and if we find it, we'll learn some of my undergraduate mentor Philip Morrison, who was one of the pioneers of SETI actually,
what said finding a single example of life anywhere. I think he said finding life on Mars would change life from a miracle to a statistic.
So we have to probably try both of those. I mean, we are trying, and I think should continue to try to advance in both of those ways towards answering those sort of questions.
What's contingent, what's convergent, but we shouldn't pretend, and it's fun to talk about this, but we just don't know until one of those programs of research succeeds are hopefully both of them.
Thank you very much.
I don't know if you discussed this before I got here, but my question is about the extremophiles and the types of life you find in sulfuric lakes and in thermal vents and something like the tardigrade where, you know, what's going on with these creatures and do they share DNA with us?
Yeah, good question. Yes, they do. They share DNA with us. It's interesting. There are studies now where you can take a given organism that's a mesophile that grows at our temperature, let's say, and the same organism that's the thermophile equivalent.
So it does the same things, and it has DNA that's pretty similar, except it just happens to live at the higher temperatures. And you can ask what are the differences, and now there's something like 50 different thermophiles for which a lot of proteins are known and understood clearly and so forth.
It's an interesting process. You can rationalize to some extent how the proteins changed and how they became better at folding up and doing their enzyme activities at the other temperatures.
But they otherwise, their organisms just like us, the DNA, you know, across species, the DNA is very similar. The difference between everybody in this room is about 0.1% in your DNA. The difference between all of us and chimpanzees is about 1% and between us and the great apes is something like 4%.
And it's the same thing with thermophiles and mesophiles. The differences are really small and subtle.
So we can't really talk about the absolute requirement for life, though, in terms of...
No, exactly. It depends on the environment.
And also, just to add, I mean, those extremophiles, we call them extremophiles. Many of them do not do well in our environment, our preferred environmental conditions. So to them, we are the extremophiles.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
