I want to welcome you to this roundtable at the Helix Center.
I'm Ed Nursecien, the Director of the Center.
Today's roundtable and tomorrow's on men men competition was proposed and organized by
Maxinshes Johnson, who is here.
Just one announcement is that the program we have with the program tomorrow, we end the
October month and then in November we have a roundtable on animal language.
So I will introduce Maxin and then she will introduce the other participants.
Maxinshes Johnson is a philosopher whose first life was a dancer, choreographer, professor
of dance and a dance scholar.
She has an ongoing courtesy professor appointment in the Department of Philosophy at the University
of Oregon and she has published numerous articles and a number of books.
Her books are The Roots of Thinking, The Roots of Power, Animate Form and Gendered Bodies,
The Roots of Morality, The Primacy of Movement and the Corporal Turn and Interdisciplinary
Readers.
She received an MA in dance and a PhD in dance and philosophy from the University of Wisconsin
where she also studied evolutionary biology.
She was awarded a distinguished fellowship for her studies of xenophobia by the Institute
of Advanced Study, Durham University, the United Kingdom in its inaugural years, the
team of which was the legacy of Charles Darwin.
Maxin.
Thank you and I'm going to just stand up for this part because I want to introduce all
of you to everyone here.
But first I would like first to thank Ed Narsesian and Mary for their wonderful hospitality.
It's been quite extraordinary.
I want also to thank Robert Pinser for all of his work on the website.
I don't know who Robert Pinser is but.
Couldn't be anything.
Ah.
Pardon?
Could I?
Could I?
Sit through.
Thank you.
Ah.
Thank you.
Yes.
For anyway, the website and all of the emails that were sent out in terms of the website.
In terms of this roundtable discussion.
I also wanted to mention that I was delighted that the Helix Center had started again.
I think it's just a wonderful institution and I hope it thrives and continues because
I think it's a great wonderful thing to do for the community and for being open to the
public as it is.
I think it's really quite a unique institution.
So I would like to just say yay for the Helix Center.
I also want to say that one of the participants cannot be here tonight.
Linda Kapourial, she has a very highly seriously injured hamstring and she could not make it
from Renslauer Institute.
So she will not be joining us.
Jesus Yalundein.
We have a somewhat, actually I guess, an international duo of participants.
Jesus is from Spain and from the Basque country.
Is that all right?
Yeah.
It's really strange to know that doesn't it?
He is an associate professor of philosophy.
He teaches very widely in the area of philosophy, everything in epistemology to the kind of
lowly subject of aesthetics in philosophy.
And he was awarded various distinctions awarded to him from the university, one of which I
can't remember the name.
It's the Samuel Ege Graf Faculty Achievement Award in 2008 and 2009 and the Allen and Pat
Kelly Faculty Scholar Award.
So he has been very active in promoting philosophy.
His main area of interest in terms of his life as well as his, both academically and real
life, is sports.
And as he put down in his self description, it's his main interests are in pedaling and
swimming.
I want also to introduce Scott Kelso, who was founder and director for 20 years of the
Center for Behavioral and Brain Sciences at Florida Atlantic University.
He has had a highly distinguished career.
This serves both in Dublin in a newly...
Derry.
In Ulster, he has a visiting professorship there as well as his continuing studies and
work and supervisions at Florida Atlantic University.
He's well known for his book on dynamic patterns and his more recent book that he co-edited
with somebody from Denmark on complementarity.
So I also want to introduce...
I have never had this pleasure before, but I want to introduce my husband, Albert A.
Johnstone, who is going to fill in as needed for Linda.
I'm sorry, really, that all of you weren't present at the very lively discussion that
we had over dinner because I thought that we should all meet beforehand and have some
kind of interchanges because no one knew each other, really.
I knew them, but they didn't know each other at all.
And we had a very wonderful, lively conversation at dinner time thinking about what we would
talk about here.
So that said, I hope I didn't leave anything out.
So we were going to talk about life and movement.
And there are a few remarks that I just want to make just generally before we start.
And that is that to begin with, we are all movement-born.
We are precisely not stillborn.
The second thing that I would like to say is that movement forms the eye that moves before
the eye that moves forms movement.
The third thing I'd like to say is that infants aren't pre-linguistic.
Language is post-kinetic.
I think those are major insights that can be empirically demonstrated and empirically
investigated for the benefit of all.
Oh, I should also mention that just by way of, in case I have any lapses or stumblings,
we are from the central Oregon coast in a little village called Yahats, which is called
the gem of the Oregon coast.
And it took us 21 hours to get to New York.
And we arrived at six o'clock this morning, and we had four hours sleep.
So if I have lapses, I hope you will please forgive me because it's just a matter of lack
of fortitude and 82 that can be quite telling.
But anyway, I wanted to mention too that the last chapter of the primacy of movement in
this expanded edition that came out in 2011, that the last chapter, which is part of the
expanded edition, starts out with a sentence that movement is coming to the fore, though
it's not yet called by its real name.
It's very often talked about in terms of embodiment, embodied subjectivity, embodied self, embodied
experience, and lo and behold, even embodied movement.
And that really you can find in the notable neuroscientist Francisco Varela in an article
he co-wrote with Natalie Depros, who's a well-known French philosopher.
And you can find it as well in a book called Embodied Cognition, which is written by a
psychologist by the name of Raymond Gibbs.
So the term embodiment is bandied around a lot.
I call it a lexical band aid because what it does is just, you put it in front of something
and it's supposed to make everything okay because it comes from the body.
So you can talk about embodied language, you can talk about embodied anything, and it doesn't
really elucidate what it is that you're focusing on in the way that, with the amplitude that
it can or should be.
Something similar can be said in terms, from my way of thinking, in terms of an inactive
approach, which also slides by the realities of movement because it ends up being not only
an active approach but in terms of inaction, but then you have to embed the body and you
have to extend the mind and you have to, what is the other thing that they talk about?
Well just embodied minds, they talk about embodied minds which are embedded and then extended.
So anyway, they're not really, to my mind, getting at the heart of movement, which is
dynamics.
And until you realize that movement is about dynamics, it seems to me that you don't really
get to understanding movement at all.
And in terms of the life and movement, Roundtable itself here tonight, it's interesting that
someone when it was mentioned that it was going to be about life and movement, that that
was the title, someone said, oh you're going to talk about animal communication.
Life and movement has, pardon?
That has to do with, life and movement has to do with us as living, moving beings.
So I think it's really important that we bring this topic up for discussion.
Then I just wanted to mention a few quotations.
One is from Aristotle.
Aristotle wrote that nature is a principle of motion and change.
We should therefore understand what we mean by motion because otherwise nature would not
be understood at all.
The second person that I'd like to just refer to is a philosopher by the name of Edmund
Husserl, who is the founder of phenomenology, who said and wrote about the fact that I move
precedes I do or I can do.
But what he meant by I can do is not simply I can run and I can jump and I can do these
things.
But I can calculate.
I can judge.
I can do all these things, but in the beginning everything precedes from I move.
All of our repertoire of I cans is generated on the principle of I move.
And finally I would like to cite Darwin, who wrote that experience shows that the mind
cannot be understood by attacking the citadel itself.
And is a function of body.
We must therefore understand, no, we must therefore find and argue from some stable
foundation from which, I got that mixed up, we must bring some stable foundation from
which to argue.
We must bring and he underscored stable.
So that was, experience shows the problem of the mind cannot be solved by attacking the
citadel itself.
The mind is function of body.
We must bring some stable foundation to argue from.
Now I wouldn't say that we need to argue from that, but we need to show it.
And the problem is that what, I mean if you say to somebody what study movement, how can
you study movement, it won't stay still.
So with that, we will start our discussion.
And hope we can pin it down.
So I thought that we might start out with this question of life and movement with respect
to, I didn't finish introducing Bert.
Is it fine?
I'm having one of my lapses from, Bert is a philosopher, also a courtesy professor at
the University of Oregon.
He's currently writing a book called the Pan-Culturality of, on the Pan-Culturalt Human.
And he's just published an article having to do with emotions, which ties emotions to
basic somatic responses, which is a very interesting article and it's published in a journal called
Whoser All Studies.
Sorry.
So we're starting our session then on life and movement.
And the first question that was generated was what is the nature of life and movement?
And as I said, I think that our clue comes in dynamic.
So do you want to start in, Scott?
But just to follow up with Maxine, it's a pleasure being here this evening.
It's very courageous that people want to Friday evening to come and talk about this
topic and discuss it.
Just to grind what Maxine has been saying, I am an experimentalist in a way of matters
of movement.
And I want to tell you about a little study that was done, I think, by...
Okay.
Caroline Rové-Kagier.
And just to make it clear what we're talking about here in terms of dynamics and coordination,
little babies, two months old, spontaneously kick.
And when they're comfortable and fed, they kick quite a lot.
Well what Caroline did was very clever.
She tied a string to the toe of the baby and connected it to a mobile.
And so when the baby kicked, the mobile moved.
And at a certain point in time, about 13 or 14 weeks of age, the baby realized this is
me doing that.
Right?
So now the baby sees what psychologists might say a connection between what they're doing
and what they're seeing.
And in fact it's a very lawful relationship.
You move, the mobile moves, the mobile moves, you move.
It's a coupled dynamical system.
So when you hear about motion and dynamics, you often think about physics.
But actually that's only part of the story.
The part of the story has to do with the dynamics of the coordination.
And in this case, as a scientist you ask, what are the relevant quantities that describe
this coordination between the organism, in this case the baby, and the lawful effects
that the organism has on his or her world and vice versa.
So when we talk about dynamics, or at least when I talk about dynamics, I'm often talking
about coupled dynamical systems and the scientific questions are, in terms of understanding,
what are the relevant quantities that wrap up or capture the coordination, and then what
form did the dynamics take?
And that means that actually you would want to, if you could, formally write equations
of motion for the relevant quantities.
Let me just say a few further words about this.
I often tell my students, because when people think about motion, they think about physics
typically.
But that's not what we're talking here about tonight.
We're talking as Maxine has written beautifully about, we're talking about animated motion.
We're talking about agency here.
We're not just talking about movement as some disembodied state of affairs, but rather we're
talking about voluntary, purposeful activity.
And often that's spontaneous and we can go on and talk about that.
So the key point then is how do we understand purposeful animated movement?
You might say, well, we have the physics of the inanimate, actually we've got very beautiful
descriptions of that.
But isn't it strange that we don't have a science of the animated movement?
And could it be actually that this is something we just take for granted so much.
It's so much a part of us that we take it for granted.
And so we don't see the mystery in it somehow.
We've lost the ability to look at something and see that this is a mysterious process.
How does it really work?
And this little example of the baby suddenly realize movement forms the eye that moves
before the eye that moves forms movement in sheets, Johnson terms, is exactly like that.
This is the origins of agency here.
And the origins of agency in this case comes by virtue of a coupling between the organism
and the environment.
And the quantities that capture that are what science wants to go after, actually, in well-defined
experimental conditions and so on.
So you might just say one or two further words about this because there is an issue here
because movement is so much a part of all of us.
There are facial gestures, the way you speak, the way you sit, you're shifting pastures,
all of this.
It's part of this.
You might say, well, you know, I want to study the real thing.
You know, I want to study it in the wild, as it were.
And of course, that's interesting to do that.
And people are doing that.
And there are fields, for example, in sports.
There may be a segue into Hissus, but they're studying that in real world settings.
But in science, the progress has always been that there has to be an abstraction somehow.
You see, going back to Newton didn't give you the laws of motion for a falling leaf.
The reason is that the falling leaf, if you look around you today in New York City, how
do leaves fall?
Well, they tumble and they rotate and sometimes they go straight down.
Depending on many, many factors, and the leaves are different, and so on.
So the point is that the apocryphal story of the apple falling on Newton's head was the
abstraction.
That's the key thing.
He abstracted out of that the notion of a point mass.
He ignored friction, for goodness sake, which is something that we would find very difficult
to ignore, a natural property like that.
And that's how he got to the essence of the problem.
Or Galileo rolling a ball down an inclined plane.
Somehow now from there you go to the motions of the planets.
This is what one would say a science of movement could be about.
Just to say we need to see what the abstractions are so that we can do the dynamics on those
relevant variables.
In my own case, the inspiration for that came from a very, very strange place because when
I was a graduate student in Wisconsin, people were talking about movements as strings of
reflexes or as a consequence of cybernetic devices that have reference mechanisms and
comparators, and you compare feedback to those reference mechanisms, and you adjust the program
of movement and so on.
But none of this actually gives you much insight into the nature of spontaneous movement behavior.
And actually for that one had to go to other places I think and ask in general, how do
patterns in nature form spontaneously in the first place?
And there you have to broaden the entire issue.
So perhaps that is enough.
I think the key point here is that agency arises out of a coupling with the world, and
that to do a science on that you have to find out what the relevant quantities are and their
dynamics.
You cannot say this is a force, this is an amplitude.
We don't know often what the relevant quantities are to proceed and do scientific research.
And the third thing would be that let's not take the whole thing for granted because that's
what we've done, and the whole issue of agency is tied up with movement and we have to make
the appropriate abstractions.
Do you want to respond to that, Jesus?
Well, I know someone said response and they elaborate.
I'll take that maybe, compliments what you're saying.
As Kat is talking about the abstractions and the calculations, right, that you go into
movement and you abstract what's common to it and how things coordinate and systems and
so on.
Can you hear back there?
Can you hear me there?
Oh.
Okay.
Adolphly louder.
But I guess we're on coming from somebody who looks at philosophy and sport together.
I want to bring more of a qualitative aspect of things.
Instead of so much the quantity and look at in terms of formula which are very needed
to understand things on one level.
I want to maybe capture what does it feel like to do something and what does it call
it to come from.
And maybe to bring it back to the issue of coordination just today or I was waiting for
dinner.
I went for a little walk.
And I saw this young lady with a little puppy.
She wasn't walking the dog.
She was running the little dog.
They're right down the street.
She's laughing and they're both kind of doing like little tag team.
She runs ahead.
She keeps, you know, and just looking at her and the puppy running in many things.
What is this about life and movement in this image right here?
And the way I look at it, it would be in terms of, and maybe you can tell me what are
the underpinnings and how this works at a deeper level.
But the way I look at it was in terms of, well, there's a certain exuberance to life.
An exploration of possibilities, if you will, of what's possible, the puppy is trying to
see how to move in the world.
It's running around and doing different explanatory movements.
There is also an expansion of the possibilities of those movements that comes with that as
well.
And as well, there was a coordination.
They had to coordinate two of them so they couldn't hang up with each other.
So if I look at coordination at a higher level, it's a way they are collaborating.
And the way, for example, the philosophy of sport, we look at this, it's quite a long
time.
People looked at movement in sports or in other aspects of life in terms of competition,
in kind of zero-sum game.
Some have to prevail here and so on.
And there are new models that are coming out to try to explain more in terms of collaboration
or cooperation.
They're trying to say, well, the fact that there may be two athletes or two beings trying
to be in the lead, like the puppy and the young lady, doesn't mean that they have to
be a winner and a loser.
There could be a way of cooperating such that both of us win, but we have to come out with
different frameworks.
And here's the quality, right?
To some extent, in you pushing me and me pushing you, we bring the best out of ourselves
in whatever activity we care about, for example.
And I think something important about movement, the way we experience it as human beings, is
the fact that it's meaningful to us in a very, very concrete manner.
When we're moving about, there are some movements that speak to us.
If we walk in, it could be a skating dancing, swimming, or something else.
There is a way to explore the richness of life in this way, I think.
And it seems to me that by looking at this in different levels, whether we're looking
at it with mathematical equations or trying to look at it from a choreography perspective,
as a choreographer, as an athlete, there are ways to try to understand movement that pay
attention to what it is like as a lead experience.
And to do that, I would like to say that we also have to, in addition to doing laboratory
experiments, which I think are very needed to understand what happens really at the inner
working, so to speak.
I think it's also important to look at practices that show us maybe movement in different gradations.
And that's why I'm just going to give you a sports, for example.
You have the level from an office to an expert.
I'm very interested in extra movement, people who do things to an extremely good level of
things.
Could be a dance writer, an Olympic athlete, a choreographer, or could be maybe someone
who maybe makes a source for cabinets.
But they have particular movements, home to perfection.
What does it tell us about what's possible for us to move like?
I think in a way they are also inspiring to us.
So the way I look at it also is not so much in terms of dynamics, but also in terms of
high matters for our existence.
I find that it's coming very inspirational.
They show us different ways to move that we didn't think of otherwise.
Well, I never thought of moving that way, maybe.
So the way that I'm interested in looking at movement, and I think that it's important,
and I may come to respond to it later, and so on, is how certain activities, what I like
to call active pursuits that happen through movement, help us to nurture a way to excel
as beings that, you know, in a way we're put together to move in the world.
I think life and movement, they are in a way to sass with the same coin.
Life expresses self-removement.
It can be otherwise.
The moment you have passivity, you have death.
Okay?
So I think by trying to explore these possibilities, and exploring life also in rich and sour
lives at different levels, both as a scientist or a philosopher or a historian or so, one
of the different ways to look into this.
Something we cannot help do is move, and I think trying to explore it and understand
is very important.
To me, I'm very interested in exploring possibilities, because like Ortega said, who was a Spanish
philosopher, he used to say, we come to life full of possibilities, but life itself proves
them very quickly.
So the more you explore, the more that's possible, the more directly you go to the rich and enjoy
life, to some extent.
And I think part of that involves, and I'm not going to close with this, is being able
to be creative and spontaneous.
Okay?
It supports what I find interesting is they give you clear constraints.
They have rules you have to serve.
So in basketball, you cannot kick the ball into the hoop.
Of course, very difficult, not that you want to do it that way, but, or in soccer, you
cannot use your hands, right?
So they give you constraints within which to be very creative, if you will.
Through these constraints, we learned to use our imagination to solve practical, artificial
problems.
We can also learn about movement in those constraints as to how we are creative and how
to actually be spontaneous.
What is the spontaneous movement or creative?
Are they the same or different?
So these are some of the questions that I can ask myself about the movement.
I think maybe that's a bramble for myself.
Thanks.
I'd like to follow up on one thing, but let me ask Bert if he has any questions or comments.
If you're going to talk about movement, it seems to me there are three other things you
have to bring in automatically.
I mean, if you're talking about human movement and not the movement of a robot, for example,
you have to bring in consciousness.
When I'm unconscious, I don't do anything very interesting.
I don't think I'm exceptional in that regard.
You have to be conscious and your awareness, what you know, comes into play and so forth.
Or acquired skills or quiet knowledge.
But your deep consciousness, you also need feeling.
If a human doesn't feel, it's not going to move.
If an form of animate life doesn't feel, it's not going to move.
Well, that gives you some kind of motive among other things for the movement.
And then thirdly, you have to have spontaneity.
I mean, you find that in your own movement.
That's the only sense in which I'm saying you have to have that.
That is, if you look at human experience, you will find that every time you move, you're
conscious, you have some motivation and you're spontaneous.
And spontaneity is a little bit puzzling as a phenomenon because you know what it is
because you're there, you exist, you exist.
But when you're doing science to cover that, I find it very puzzling how to do it.
And it's an essential ingredient.
When you have a feeling of some kind, suppose you feel cold, well, you find that you react
automatically, you do something, you start closing off to keep warm presumably.
Now that's automatic and that can very well be explained through science.
But then you get a further element that comes in.
I can, realizing that I'm cold, I can act appropriately, I mean huddle more or do whatever
I feel is appropriate here.
But there I'm acting spontaneously if you're like voluntarily.
Being that, can be a scientific account, it's a bit difficult.
The same thing is true with any emotion.
Emotion always starts involuntarily.
Something rather moves you.
You don't command your own feelings, not directly.
You can do various things to get a feeling going and whatnot, but in general you don't
start the feeling.
You get on a train that's already moving.
Something is going on already.
And what you generally do, because it's the easiest thing to do, is you go along with
it and then you try to direct it here or there and so forth.
You can also not go along with it at all.
But it takes a certain amount of training to do that.
If you're feeling angry at somebody, well, just to get involved and start pushing your
anger, helping it out and so forth, well, it's not that easy at times.
But the spontaneity or the voluntary effort that you add to your feelings is an essential
part of emotion.
And just as an essential part of any kind of action you undertake, movement you do.
The baby you were mentioning was a sheer heat.
It kicks its foot.
It notices things moving up here.
It kicks the thing moves.
It doesn't kick.
It doesn't move.
It kicks twice.
The thing moves twice.
It makes a correlation between what it does spontaneously and what that thing is doing.
And if it doesn't do it, it doesn't do it.
The two go together.
Well, how do things go together?
Yes.
The way you said it, are you saying feeling comes first, movement comes later or it can
be either way?
And the same about consciousness.
Is it that that kind of recognized, the kind of consciousness you are talking about which
is recognizing you said the me rather than just being conscious.
In your description of the baby with the kicking, you said the baby says this is me.
So this is a recognition that goes beyond regular consciousness.
And so which comes first?
Are you saying the kicking then makes the baby recognize his consciousness, his conscious
of himself or the other way around?
And that also about the emotion.
You know, it's always, it's somehow interesting the way we always like to see which comes first,
the card or the horse.
You see, in this case, that was at least the point I was trying to make that this is a
coupled system.
So and Bert is amplifying that I think very nicely that this, the baby realizes that this
is me.
I mean, we don't know what the baby is experiencing.
This is an inference, but nevertheless the fact that the baby then voluntarily kicks its
leg from first of all spontaneously kicking the leg to then voluntarily because actually
the baby then increases its kicking and producing the nice effect in the world, you see.
So I'm not convinced that the either or which comes first is the way to see things.
I would like to make a comment here or two about what Jesus said.
It's actually, we can use this sort of basic example.
You see, we're really asking the question, what are the, as it were, what is the significant
aspect of movement?
And this person sitting beside me has said the significant aspect of movement are meaningful
animated synergies.
And the synergy is a checkered concept, but I think it's very, very important in the
following sense that a synergy actually is a working together.
And in fact, this coupling of the baby and the mobile is a synergy spanning the environment
and the organism.
There are other kinds of synergies that people in evolutionary biology have talked about where
they would have two oarsmen, one each with an oar, and they want to cross the river.
Well, unless they cooperate with an effect here, so the synergy always has an effect.
It's not just a working together, but it's working together with a functional effect.
If one defects there, I mean, we've got game theory and all these things, repeated games
and so on, but the defection is a one-off.
It matters, right?
But if one defects, they'll go in a circle.
Okay, everybody, get that.
So they have to cooperate for an effect.
That is a synergy with a real effect.
Now there are other synergies that we discovered, for example, when you speak just to pull out
the properties here, imagine you have to say the word baz as in the first syllable of a
bad word, baz.
And suddenly some experimental arrangement, normally when you say the word baz, just try
it yourself, you're not really aware of it, but your jaw raises with your tongue, because
the tongue has to go to the roof of the mouth to produce a frickative sign, zaz.
Now imagine somebody who never experienced this before suddenly gets a tug to the jaw.
Then how does the system compensate?
Well, the fact is that 30 milliseconds later, the tongue is increasing its activity because
you measure the genial glasses, muscles of the tongue, which raise the tongue.
The tongue is already moving to get to the roof of the mouth in 30 thousands of a second.
Now to get the synergy idea here, the jaw and the tongue are not mechanically linked.
They are not mechanically linked, no more mechanically linked than the two people with
the oars, but they are, if you like, informationally linked, they're coupled.
And in fact, the synergy here is spanning the entire collection of elements that are
necessary for the achievement of the goal, the purpose.
You can easily change the context.
Synergies are context, beautifully, exquisitely context-dependent.
So just change the context and say, bab instead of baz, well, the tongue doesn't do a darn
thing then.
That's the upper lip.
And the upper lip is not mechanically coupled to the jaw.
So these are remote compensatory effects happening in, you know, a physiologist might say reflexively,
but they have the creativity and the generativity required to produce an outcome.
And that is the functional synergy.
That is the combination, bird, I would say, of spontaneity and agency together.
You have a goal you want to produce, some little piece of environmental perturbation
hits one of the members of this putative assembly, and other remote members will immediately
compensate.
So this, I think, turns out to be quite important because you can then ask, well, how are synergies
formed and how do they change?
And then you're really asking questions about how any pattern or any collective pattern
of behavior changes under what conditions and so on.
So spontaneity and intentionality are intimately linked in this way.
If I may, I'm going to interject two things, and it's backtracking a little bit.
I want to go back to Ed's question about emotion with respect to movement.
And that is that it seems to me that there's an overlooked dimension of movement, of emotions
and movement in our everyday lives.
And that is that emotions move through the body and move us to move in particular ways.
Emotions move through the body.
We don't trust moves through the body in ways different from fear.
Joy moves through the body in ways different from sadness.
There are differences in the way emotions move through the body and the way in which
they move through the body moves us to move in certain ways.
And it seems to me that that relationship substantiates a dynamic congruency in form
between emotions and movement, which is why it's a formal congruency, which is why we
can both feign an emotion.
We can pretend, oh, how nice it is to meet you when we're really thinking, oh, God.
And we can also restrain an emotion instead of doing such and such instead of slapping
somebody in the face, we restrain ourselves.
There is a dynamic congruency between emotions and movement, which allows us to a formal dynamic
congruency, which allows us, in fact, to feign or restrain ourselves.
The other thing that I just want to mention is-
I'd say these synergies are different in those cases if you actually look at that carefully.
Yes, I'm sure that they are.
Yeah.
Because the synergies of meaningful movement that have to do with deeper aspects as well
as the what's out there overtly.
The other thing, going back to Jesus's point about excelling and also in relation to spontaneity,
it seems to me that one of the problems that we have in terms of taking movement for granted
is precisely in terms of falling into habitual ways of doing things and overlooking the realities
of the experience itself.
If when we are in tune with the realities of the experience itself, we can wash dishes
like this, or we can wash them and just kind of think around.
There are all kinds of ways in which the qualitative dynamics of what we are doing can come to
the fore to us.
When we pay attention in that way, we can indeed enlarge on the possibilities.
It seems to me that people who study- there's nothing wrong with studying abnormal behavior,
but it seems to me that those who excel in behavior, not behavior, excel in movement,
that was a great lapse.
Sorry.
We also need to study on the other end, those who excel not just the abnormal, but those
who are at the extreme end on the other side.
What comes to me as a kind of insight in relation to this is when I was in my first life as
dance, I realized that there's a great difference between moving through a form and having the
form move through you.
When the form moves through you, you are actually experiencing the movement.
When you're moving through a form, you're doing something habitual.
The spontaneity, it doesn't seem to me as there precisely because it goes unrecognized
as an experience.
It doesn't come forth in a real genuine way.
I don't know if that makes sense to any of you, but those are two comments I would make.
If we could maybe pause and ask how we understand spontaneity, how we understand the emergence
of anything, it's spontaneity.
It's a question of how you would actually study that because, again, it's rather difficult.
One way would be, for example, that you could think of an animal, a quadrupedal creature,
walking.
That's actually a good trick how creatures walk and locomote.
Every creature does, but the laws of locomotion are not really that well understood.
But where the spontaneity comes in is that animals change gate.
That is, they switch from walking to trotting.
And they switch from trotting to galloping.
It turns out that there's a lot of different gates that quadrupedal creatures have.
And so you could start to think about, well, what analogies might you make between an animal
changing gate as a spontaneous event?
It's a spontaneous event.
And other examples of spontaneous pattern formation and nature.
Well it turns out, by that I mean that under certain conditions you can take a system with
very, very many microscopic components, like you, like all of us, at a great detailed
level, at a molecular level, millions and millions and billions and all of that stuff.
But somehow under certain conditions they form structures and patterns.
And the physics of that is very interesting.
It's called the physics of non-equilibrium phase transitions.
So from a methodological point of view, how you go after spontaneity in this case is you
say, could there be an analogy between an animal changing gate, which means it's changing
the ordering among its limbs and other phenomena in nature where you see the spontaneous emergence
of pattern, like in fluids or in clogged patterns or in material in different forms of matter,
magnetism and so on.
And the very interesting aspect is that all the features of the gate change, the spontaneous
change in coordination, all the signatures of that are seen in that kind of a system,
just as the same signatures are seen in other physical systems that are open to exchanges
with energy and matter with their surrounds are non-equilibrium or non-linear because this
is a non-linear abrupt change.
So the origins of spontaneity here come through these non-linear changes.
And once you know that, then you can say, well, how do I modify that?
And that means you have to bring in intentionality and learning and so on.
But without knowing this, here is the key point.
Without knowing how spontaneous patterns arise under certain conditions, you don't really
know what to modify.
I call that intrinsic dynamics.
You need to know the intrinsic spontaneous dynamics so that you can know what to modify.
It's kind of akin in general, if you think of it in general.
You don't go in and try to modify a system without knowing a lot about its spontaneous
activities, its intrinsic dynamics.
If you get what I mean, you can take that to a lot of aspects of life actually in society.
You start interfering because you don't know what you're doing.
It's only when you understand the spontaneous patterns that you can now say, this is the
space that I want to change things and modify.
Modification happens in that space.
You had a comment, go ahead.
Well, I guess I was wondering, it seems to me that once you're playing in this way where
you say, well, eventually you have to bring it into a scenario, but you have these non-linear
changes.
But what makes the difference at our level is that we have to reflect which changes to
accommodate.
And it's to be there is something deliberate about it that's not accidental, to some extent.
So I'm wondering, is that part of the spontaneity then our deliberation about how to work with
these possibility repertoire of movements or that we have available so that we seem to
pick the better ones.
I don't see, for example, a paramecium which is exploring with a little cilia, trying
to see what kind of movements are possible for me to get food.
But I don't know to what extent it's able to conceptualize, if you were through movements,
you know, well, these are the movements that work for me and not those.
At what level do we bring maybe this ability to work with this or does it happen automatically?
Yes, so this gets technical fact because actually in the case of the bacterium or the
paramecium, your point is that they have multiple possibilities.
And so in fact that's the essential aspect of spontaneity.
So that you can choose as it were which one suits the current conditions.
And that's again a quite general property and it's also a feature of the kinds of order
transitions that occur in quadrupedal locomotion, you see.
So that's a key point, having many possibilities because often in science people like to study
one thing.
So you study a monkey doing one thing.
But the monkey has a whole range of possibilities that are never explored.
And you don't know actually then what the neural underpinnings of that are.
The system is highly, what we say, highly degenerate.
There are many ways to accomplish the same function at every known level, molecular all
the way up to social signaling.
That's a key feature again.
Yeah, this reminds me of something that we discussed for a very little bit, but to some
degree at dinner.
And that is wouldn't you say that this is at a living level connected with kinetic intelligence?
In other words, with the knowledge that an animal, human or non-human brings to life
itself on the basis of the bodies they are to go back to what Darwin said about mine
being a function of body to draw on that.
We all have a basic kinetic intelligence with respect to our icons to draw also on
Husserl what we can do and how we can possibly enlarge our repertoire of icons.
Yes, I think you see we are very used to thinking of this word intelligence in terms, for example,
of computation and kind of symbolic intelligence.
Going back to Darwin, of course, Darwin's worms proved to be enlightening and terribly
intelligence and ants too.
Ants as we know, termites, for example, build beautiful structures under certain conditions.
Put in some fear among gradients, put in a little positive feedback or to catalysis,
and they start to create structures and pillars and arches.
So the ant, you can say the ant is an architect.
Well, it doesn't make any sense, you ask, what are the necessary and sufficient conditions
for this kind of architecture to emerge and it looks intelligent and we say it's intelligent.
But in fact, as you say, it's a natural intelligence in contrast perhaps to an artificial intelligence,
the way we think about intelligence.
And it can lie dormant in many…
Underappreciated.
Underappreciated in humans, I think, because in part because many times when people think
of movement and they think in terms of exercising and if you go through these exercises and
you're going to be fit, et cetera, but that's really a matter of going through the motions
rather than being attuned and listening to the actual experience of movement and listening
to what's there dynamically, qualitatively in the movement that you're involved in,
that is moving through you.
Yes, it's highly creative and generative.
I mean, there are beautiful examples and sports of that as well.
I think there was just a…
I don't know if anybody knows soccer, but there was a great example of this where
in the… before the last World Cup, a very famous soccer player called Thierryon Rie was
playing for France and they happened to be playing against Ireland, so I had invested
interest in this.
But the ball came to him at somewhere between his knees and his shoulders and he couldn't
control the ball with his knee and he couldn't get his head down to it, so he just used his
hand and it was called the hand of God.
You see, no, the referee didn't see it, but it was… it was almost reflexive.
It's exactly like this very generative.
It never done it before.
It's against the rules, but it accomplished the goal.
You see?
What we're dealing with here is… and it was so reflexive, but then it's not reflexive
in the case of some stimulus response kind of thing.
It's never been done before.
I wasn't just in that example.
The thing about it too is that there has to be a way in which… I mean, he used the
hand because he knew his goal was to manipulate the ball to go to a particular place.
He was a modern choice in a way.
But he still… and they sort of speak pretty flexibly perhaps, but he knows the goal is
to move the ball to a particular place.
So he has trained himself to act with a particular object in a particular way.
So he's certain rules in mind.
And he comes… like you say, he's supposed to use his hand.
That's what comes out spontaneously.
While he's trained, he's still trying to play soccer.
Even when he knows that the hand's not allowed to be used, it was the only thing that he
could given the goal because he…
Because he…
And there the goal is primary too, that means to how to achieve it.
But it shows you, I think, beautifully the context and specificity, the generativity,
the creative aspect of skilled behavior.
And that was the question I guess I had going back to…
I was just going to say that I do want to leave time to have questions and comments
from all of you out there.
So we'll make this the last comment.
That's fine.
Very quick.
That's fine.
I guess I was just wondering, going back to Sondad Berg's way to go to spontaneity.
And it's the role of maybe not simply bottom-up, let's try to explain the generations'
spontaneity from neurons and so on.
But maybe from the top-down in terms of how maybe different cultures might also help us
to use this formal way of dealing with emotions through these formalized movements, right?
And it seems like at some level we do bring a way to be deliberate.
That is qualified in a very strong way by a cultural way.
It could be a practice like soccer, what's not allowed, it could be a way to behave in
a personal distance or how to express emotions.
I mean, to what level does those affect perhaps spontaneity or emotions or does it trickle
down as well?
I don't know, I'm just wondering.
Do you want to…
No, I'll let you put your hands.
That you get a lot…
You get a lot going on.
You get a kind of automatic response.
You get things you're used to doing, you could call them habits, I suppose.
But there was their voluntary in the sense that you could stop them if you wanted.
And even there, their degrees are being able to stop.
And then there's a kind of voluntary adding on without it being very reflective.
You can also reflect on the whole situation, side you want to do, you want to go ahead
with this and so forth.
It's horribly complicated.
I mean, the degrees you get of these various factors coming in here.
I like this word amass.
I think Freeman Dyson wrote a little bit about, you know, when we're talking about life,
life is DNA, you see.
Well, it's not just DNA, it's metabolism as well.
You have to have renewal processes, not just, I say, the two-ars, reproduction and renewal.
You need both of those, you need both metabolism and as it wears some kind of informational basis.
It's actually the same with coordination.
People like coordination, they like to see the ordered coordination.
And it looks like synchrony and so on.
And there's an awful lot of work going on.
For example, last week I was at the Society for Neuroscience.
And there were many symposia on synchronization in the brain and oscillations in the brain
that are cognitively relevant, and behaviorally relevant, and even emotionally relevant actually,
that seem to have some correlation to the states of creatures.
But actually it turns out that synchronicity and oscillation is just one the ordered part.
And when you look more closely, it's a much more subtle tendency to synchronize and also
a tendency for the parts to behave autonomously, to do their own thing.
So you have this kind of duality of a tendency to cooperate and a tendency for the parts to
do their own thing, almost compete.
So you have this subtle cooperation, competition, integration, segregation.
This is a key characteristic of dynamics and coordination.
So that's the beast, that's the mess that we have to recognize.
That DNA metabolism, how that's worked out, is really not still understood, even though
we've got the genome and all that stuff.
But now we come to coordination in the brain that is underlying everything that's going
on here in a way.
And that turns out again to be messier than the way we as scientists tend to think about
it.
But mess in this sense that it's not as simple as you'd like.
Exactly.
It's not too simple, but it's not too complicated.
It's sort of in this nice place in between.
And that's where we have to look at things closely, I think.
But I think dynamics are challenging precisely because they're messier to understand and
investigate than something solid and in place that has spatial clarity and exists here.
And you can really look at it and dynamics is fluctuating and changing.
Yes.
So, I mean, the dynamics literally is spatial temporal.
It's in space and in time.
And in force.
And as a flow.
Well, there are underlying forces perhaps, yes.
But in terms of at least of the pattern dynamics, it's more...
Like this.
It's more spatial temporal.
Yeah.
So, any questions or comments?
Yes.
I'd like to throw a couple of things out and then you can deal with them.
You speak of importance almost the necessity of movement for life.
At one point saying life and movement are one, I think I heard specifically what's
said.
What about a quadrupolegic or someone in an iron lung?
That's the first thing.
As to emotional response, whether or not you're responsible for it, something inside
you unconsciously reacts to something you hear and you respond consciously.
It reminds me a little bit of Sam Harris' explanation of free will.
If in fact, there is free will.
Your example of the baby and synergy doesn't have to include consciousness.
The synergy existed even as the baby was not conscious before the baby became conscious
of the connection between his foot and the moving mobile.
And the last thing is deliberate against spontaneous.
Deliberate...
I don't have a dictionary, but deliberate, I think, is conscious.
Spontaneous is not unconscious.
So rehorses changing their gates, I believe, correct me if I'm mistaken, that horses,
gates, stored as deliberate because they're learned and they become spontaneous.
So I leave you with that.
Let me suggest that you take or that we all take one because I would like to have other
questions besides which one would you like to focus on?
The questions are all a little bit connected, I think, in a way.
But I think this important question you raised, but the synergy is there before it's manifest.
Is it really?
How do you know that?
I don't know that.
But it occurs to me that there's something I like about that idea in the sense that we
study, for example, the synergies between people in interpersonal coordination.
We study actually interbrain coordination as it turns out.
And I think there's a very interesting question there about the relation between self and
other in the case of the baby between the baby and the organism and the environment.
Is this energy there beforehand?
Does it pre-exist?
The possibility, I think, coming to Jesus's point exists, but it doesn't exist until
it's manifest, in my opinion.
So in the case of the self and the other, I think this may be taken as often different
directions, but I think, for example, the field of neuroscience has stressed the individual
brain, you know, Je pons d'hon je jous sous, I think, therefore I am.
But another way would be to say I am because you are.
So there's a self-other, but the self-other doesn't pre-exist.
It only exists in the relation of the two.
And I think that's the same case of the baby.
The synergy doesn't really exist until the conditions are set up, that it can be manifest.
That would be, does that sound odd?
I think in some cases, you see, again, again, again, again, again, you, what?
I thought I was on a scientific level.
I'm an average person.
But that's a synergy.
It exists in some kind of experience.
A synergy is a functional grouping of elements that are temporarily constrained to act as a
single unit.
That's more with feeling.
A synergy is an assembly of elements temporarily constrained to function as a single unit.
The question of how it arises, I mean, we could talk about that.
But that would be the definition in all the cases that we've been discussing.
Now, whether that's conscious or unconscious, again, is the brain synchronized?
Is it desynchrony?
We love to have this either or logic.
And I think where we're going to actually is more of a both and logic than an either
or the synergy could be both conscious and unconscious quite easily.
Yeah, that's a good complementarity point.
That's actually the kind of thing.
Bring up.
It doesn't have to be either or.
Maybe it's complementary or cubios of by degrees, maybe.
So there are different levels of achievement, synergy.
Things have to be full on synergy or completely lacking that or full on conscious or unconscious.
It may also be swapping up around.
For example, I feel that let's speak about being in the zone, something like that, flow
or mushy in martial arts, right?
And they say, well, that's when you're not thinking about it.
But I think that's really what's really happening.
You really pay attention.
What's going on?
There are both conscious and unconscious.
There are some things that you kind of put in the background, if you will.
But there are some other things you are hyper alert.
So maybe there are degrees and ways of being synergic or conscious of something.
And you use them depending on what the goal is and the needs of the moment.
There's maybe a possibility to open up so it's not simply to have one or not and what
are the conditions.
And it could be a scientific level.
It could be an experiential level.
And the one that maybe matters to you when you're trying to solve a problem that you
have in your face.
It could be very practical, so that I won't want to sleep on the ice, maybe.
And the more attention I paid to, maybe the more tricky it's all around.
So I think it could be a combination, maybe, or this is a suggestion.
Another question, Ed?
I'd like to hear a little more thought about agency, which came up very early on.
But we didn't really return to it.
I think we've got elements of agency here, spontaneity, consciousness.
One thing was left out.
It seems like agency would require a sense that movement produces an effect in the environment
that I, although not yet an ego in any formal or strict sense, can make a difference by
my movement to the configuration of a given environment.
That seems different from modes of movement that really may make no difference.
Idle movement, we could call them, just moving, so to speak, producing no effect and not actually,
therefore, tempting us to ascribe the movement to an agent.
I don't mean a full-blown agent.
I don't mean a rational agent.
I don't even mean a conscious agent.
But I mean some kind of being who by moving actually insinuates itself into the world in
such a way that the world comes out a little bit different, if only the mobile moving slightly.
So somehow in this series of terms that you've all been developing richly and I think paying
a due attention, respecting their deep ambiguity, that's one thing I really enjoy.
No one's coming across definitions that we need to adhere to.
You're actually exploring, I think, the penumbra of all these terms.
But agency is, I think, still suspended in the air.
And I wonder if we could return to it briefly and now say where is agency?
Who is the agent and how is agency related to motion, to movement?
Could you give an example of what you mean by a less definitive agency when you said that
there's no impact on the world?
Well I don't want to have a Cartesian agency or I don't want to have a mind.
I mean if I go like that.
Yeah if I just go like that, you know, and I'm really doing it, I would say like flapping
my wings to no effect as we say in English, right?
Then I'm not sure that's agency.
It's movement.
Is that what you mean?
Well that's sort of what I'm getting at.
Yeah how do we deal with that?
Is that a lower level, you see, do we reach a level of non-agentive movement here?
Maybe we call that involuntary.
Although I actually suspect that the class, that that class of non-agent driven movement
is sometimes voluntary and sometimes heads toward the barely voluntary.
But it's not really a matter of agency.
So I wondered if you folks could comment on that puzzle.
The way to say it all different levels.
Unless you want to define agent to rule out some of the levels, if I'm doing it, if I'm
shaking my foot like that and if I'm aware of the thing just vaguely aware, it's there
in the background, I'm still the agent.
I'm not the agent in the way in which I scratch my head, for example.
There I have an itch and I know what I'm doing and I direct my fingers accordingly.
I don't know a little bit over here, but so forth.
That's an essential part of this thing going on.
I'm not unconscious and this is not a twitch.
This is something I'm doing.
But my participation is minimal.
So you have agents if you like it at a lot of different levels.
I don't know what to do with that.
It just seems to me that's the way the world is.
There's a comment from, yes.
I have the advantage of having a stroke, by the way, in my movement center.
So my right side is different from my left.
I'm also the president of La Bon Institute of Movement Studies.
So irony of all ironies.
Now also a radio show.
I'm very interested in the movements of the sound of things.
So I've had a very interesting journey from no control of my trunk or my head to finally
being able to move.
Amazing.
And in the process, I've had a lot of interaction, say, with honey, my dear friend, who both
drives and does her thing.
And she also walks me.
What is the gate?
I was famous, Pardot, poor, poor.
The fact that I could look at the gate and say there is no gate.
Everyone moves differently.
So La Bon was probably the first person to look at movement and say there is a language
here.
There are symbols to be used.
There is continuity.
There are sphere.
There are movements that are not linear and very circular in nature.
And as you said, Maxine, the qualitative aspects interest me very, very much, both recuperating
from my stroke, which I'm going to talk about in my new later in April, but still fascinating
to me was that there is no gate in my language.
There is no linear, non-agent involved in movement.
There is only movement and its qualitative differences in all aspects of movement.
So when you have a sperm who cannot move like other spurs, it moves differently.
It meets an egg that moves differently.
And a zygote occurs that suddenly moves differently from all other zygotes.
It's cute.
So what you phrase is instantaneously beyond that, believe me, there are even impetus who
say, well, we actually know consciously there is an agent before we are, quote, born and
conceived that we listened to what was said.
There are people that have many different opinions.
And yes, we are in a mess in terms of movement.
But where are you interested?
What is your particular take?
It's wonderful to hear everyone's different takes and my different take because of what
I have experienced both socially and individually, et cetera.
I'm very, very interested in all of what you say.
And I'm most interested in hearing the qualitative differences, as I said, in movement.
And I will once again say, Erm got by Chin F was my mentor, but La Bonn really gave me
the opportunity, crudely caveman level that La Bonn was at, the opportunity to look at
movement as something other than English words.
Very important.
And English word like gait, et cetera.
And it's very helpful.
I just to make a side comment.
I've been told many times by many people who do La Bonn analysis that the phenomenology
of movement that I gave in the phenomenology of dance coincides very, in very complementary
ways with La Bonn analysis.
Thank you.
Have a question back there, yes?
Yeah, I just make a comment just before you start.
I like the idea of qualitative differences, of course.
I had early experiences with La Bonn notation as well.
The, actually, I think this, I mean, one needs to be careful about using words.
When I used the word gait, I meant a pattern of coordination between the legs.
If I was looking at a person who had a stroke, I would be looking at the pattern of connectivity
in their brain.
I've done that as well.
So the qualitative effects come when the patterns change, right?
Not just smoothly and linearly, as you elegantly say, but qualitatively.
And in fact, the example of an animal changing gait, if you pardon, you know, changing the
ordering among its components, is a qualitative change in the same sense as a physical system,
like water changes from ice to liquid.
It's a qualitative change.
There's nothing wrong with the word qualitative.
And it turns out it has many quantitative consequences, important quantitative consequences
for these kinds of changes.
So that's really, you know, let's talk about qualitative effects.
The key thing from a scientific point of view would be the differences on what dimensions.
Let's see.
Yeah.
But that's precisely, again, here's another dichotomy, qualitative versus quantitative.
Please don't see those as a dichotomy.
See them as actually complementary and mutually related.
They are indeed, actually, it's quite beautiful.
There are quantitative consequences of qualitative change that can be picked up and used as signatures
for predicting the upcoming change and so on.
And it is our duty, I was going to say, to really try to fathom the way in which they
are related.
To find the complement, this is a term of Scott's, to find the complementarity between
the two, rather than to keep perseverating on these dual paths.
If I can just very briefly, one very quick thing, and we got to do it, right?
You are just going to connect to issues you raised.
You raised a one point of paraplegic or people who are not able to move in an able way if
you will, right?
And somebody who has maybe a stroke, right, who finds not able to move the way you would
like to or like most people, right?
And I think, in a way, to explore the qualitative aspect of movement or quantitative as well,
is when we look at, for example, we like to think of disabled people.
And I think to some extent, they move in different ways quite differently.
They experience it differently.
But yet, I think there are patterns of excellence as well among them.
I have in mind, for example, somebody called Kevin Nichols, who is a skier who doesn't
have any lower body, no legs, nothing.
But he's got an advantage in the skier's lobes because his liberal gravity is lower,
he can do things, nobody can do so, nobody can follow him.
Right?
So in a way, I think this is a way we might discount.
Well, you look at him and people in the street, he walks in a skateboard where he just goes
like this really fast and people do double takes, right?
He actually takes pictures of people looking at him because they are surprised.
So he's making the most of it.
But going back to the two of you, I think there are ways to look at deficient movement,
if you will.
That's how we like to qualify it, right?
And we don't really give a negative label.
But I think there are ways to think of it in different categories, which is an alternative
way to move, that has his own qualities.
And actually, sometimes you can explain it through advantage.
Okay?
So I think there are ways or rooms or spaces to open up in terms of exploration that I
think would enrich how we look at movement in meaningful ways.
It's very interesting.
It's very, very interesting.
A concept that hasn't come up here has to do with stability.
And so again, we want to know the stability of what and so on.
But the very interesting thing about qualitative change is that qualitative changes are associated
with what engineers don't like, which is instabilities.
Instabilities create new possibilities.
They create new patterns.
And that's a key dynamic.
That's a key part of the dynamics.
Yes, thank you.
That was very elegant and interesting.
Discussion, and this is rather much more mundane.
But I'm curious to ask, going back to the baby, about infant reflexes, which have an
agency that is deeply buried in the organism for survival, but is certainly not conscious
because they're reflexes.
And in fact, when they become conscious, we have control over them and basically extinguish
them.
So I'm wondering if you can talk about infant reflexes, which are movements, which have
an, as I said, a deep intentionality that is not conscious for the survival of the creature.
And when they become conscious, they actually become extinguished.
Maybe you want to address that.
More reflex, talking reflex.
Some reflexes, I guess we retain flight flight, but the basic infant reflexes, when they become
mischievous, they become
conscious, and when they become conscious, we stop them.
That's when they become integrated.
So I'm wondering if you guys can talk about that.
Do you have any examples of the moral reflex?
I can tell it doesn't make them extinct, it changes its solicitor, if you like.
It's a way of responding, and a baby responds, if you take away support, it responds like
that.
But then I respond like that, if somebody makes a big, a loud noise behind me, you know, I
go like that.
Well, the integration of the reflexes is when they become conscious and we can control them
consciously.
They're reflexes because we have no control over them when we're infants, because they
help us survive.
But then once they become integrated, we do have the conscious control over them.
And we essentially then can stop them from being reflexes.
So the idea of agent there is slightly different, and I was wondering if you could talk about
it, because it's not conscious.
The agent of the body to survive is huge when you're in the state of the baby.
But it's not a conscious, conscious agent because it's the reflex.
I would simply say that there's a, it's a bit anecdotal, but there's a beautiful study
by Japanese investigator Kofu Kuda where he shows all these sports examples where the
primitive reflex, the crossed extensor reflexes, all these reflexes are in highly skilled sports
like a baseball player going up for a fly ball.
So it looks as if these quotes reflexes, these basic patterns, these primitive patterns are
actually exploited for in highly skilled behavior.
The question of consciousness and so on, I can't really speak to, but nevertheless,
I think there's a point with respect to what you say that these basic patterns are a foundation
for all volitional movement and skilled behavior.
And that's been ignored, I agree.
As a postscript, small postscript, I would just say that neurologically, the first systems
to develop are the, are kinesthesia, which is a totally overlooked sense modality for,
for centuries and tactility, tactility and kinesthesia.
And it seems to me since those are the very first neurological systems to develop that
there has to be some kind of initial consciousness developing with respect to them because fetuses
both have a lot of different movements that they, that they generate by themselves and
there must be some, if their neurological system is developing normally, they have a
sense of their own movement in touch.
So consciousness is, has its, has its origin in tactile kinesthetic, in what I call the
tactile kinesthetic body.
I just quick follow up to that, tonight with the issue of agency, very quickly, the example
you gave of a striker who is with the hand.
That was the reflex for him.
He knows he's not supposed to be with the hand, but he wants to bail it to score.
The hand goes there, right?
Or was he knows it's not going to count?
I mean, he gets away with it, it's like him.
But one thing is just of who is responsible, well, to some extent you could say he's to
be blamed, he goes by the referee, he doesn't count because you were the agent.
At the same time, we say, well, the arm, he could say, yes, did it, yes, went, I didn't
meant to do it, right?
So there is maybe in the same system, the same agent, there could be maybe a sub-level
or a subconscious run conscious, and I think they tend to flip back and forth or compliment
sometimes on what's required.
So I think there is a connection there.
I have a slightly different response to Ed's question, and that is that I would call a
cooperativity that is, you know, obviously it involves coordination and cooperation among
the muscles and the kinesthetic support and so on, but a cooperativity with an effect,
like the evolutionary stable strategy of the two men each with an oar, and which, you
know, the defection scenario, that's cooperation with an effect, and that's where I think the
agency aspect is part of a functional synergy.
It's not a functional synergy if you just have a cooperativity.
It's only a functional synergy if you produce a consequence that is going to have evolutionary
outcomes.
Right.
Yeah.
First of all, thank you.
I'm completely fascinated and really enjoying all of you.
I'm wondering when you talk about consciousness and the degrees of consciousness, I'm thinking
about agency, excuse me, awareness.
And awareness as the relationship of organism and environment, and then consciousness as
person-world.
I wonder if you can say something about that, the developing of consciousness from, am
I clear?
Well, I would say to begin with, and I hope that the others bolster me in this, what I
said, to begin with, this seems to me that the tactile kinesthetic body is basic to the
beings we are.
In other words, kinesthesia and tactility are basic senses, and we recognize commonly
five senses and disregard our own sense of movement, which is kinesthesia.
A long time ago, Aristotle looked upon movement as a sense of komunis.
In other words, it was a sense that is common to all the senses, and he elaborated on this
in very fine ways, but he didn't ever speak of our sense of movement, which has to do
with precisely with the qualitative dynamics.
We know if we're going like this, or if we're going like this, or if we're going in it,
we have a sense of the dynamics, the qualitative dynamics of our own movement.
And when Gibson went on to talk about affordances and about a sense of komunis in terms of vision
and movement, he completely obliterated, to my mind, any real adequate, just minimally
adequate sense of kinesthesia.
It was all about getting, navigating in the environment, but not really delving into the
basic kinesthetic awareness we have of our own bodies in movement.
So anything that anyone wants to add to that tear-aid?
I guess I have a quick follow-up question.
What you mean by the world, what do you have in mind?
You have in mind the environment, or asking anything with the world?
Yeah, the environment.
Okay, I guess what I was thinking is just kind of work.
What is biological and what is interpersonal?
And do you think it is in that way?
Organism and environment sounds biological.
And organism organism isn't?
What would be the risk of biology?
What would be the risk of biology?
And then there's something else.
What?
We've been talking about conscious and unconscious and levels of consciousness and reflexes.
But I wanted to share a personal experience I had when I was 13.
I had an accident.
I was playing football and I was paralyzed in my right leg for three years.
And I was in a back brace.
And I did...
What?
I was in a back brace for three years as my spine and tailbone had been pulled apart
and a lot of ligaments were torn out and this leg didn't work.
So I remember when the doctor tapped me and there was no reflex response.
We knew we had a problem.
But I recovered and years later, about 20 years later, I was in a hypnosis class and
we did some age regression and we went back into my trinies and into my teens.
And I talked about experiences from each of those periods.
And then when I hit 15, all of a sudden, my leg was paralyzed again.
It went totally numb and I couldn't move it.
Even though I was in my 30s and the accident that happened in my teens, I re-experienced
that in a very compelling way.
And then they moved me and I was able to talk about it.
And part of my mind was able to track it.
My response to this new relationship I was having to this previous injury.
But then they moved me into my, when I was 12, before the accident happened and my leg
could move again.
So I'm just throwing this out there because it was a fascinating experience for me to
be able to re-live this experience.
Before the accident, my reflexes were working, then the accident happened and there was this
disconnect and the reflexes weren't there.
Then I was healed because I was young enough.
It was corrected by the back brace.
So the reflexes were there again.
But then as an adult, I could revisit, imaginatively, in a trance state, not having that reflex
response again.
And I'm wondering how fluid and malleable and dynamic the brain mind world is.
And another question I have, this is just off the top of my head, how can my mind be
separate from anyone's body, anyone else's body?
I think this is, how could my mind be separate from your body?
I'm curious about that because it seems to me, we talk about brain a lot as something
separate from other brains, brain mind, body, world.
So I hope there's a question there.
I'm just throwing this out there.
So thank you very much for allowing me to share this experience.
Let me walk backwards from when that deal was in how we connect with the world, maybe,
on our minds or our bodies.
I think maybe trying to raise people's mind and body, separate our brain is part of the
problem.
I think to some extent, we're the each other's language through our bodies, right?
And we respond to each other's behavior, movements, actions in particular ways.
So I think it doesn't extend where you neither come on in future we share a way of moving
the world and a kind of a spiritual space if you're a human space or with other creatures
that move us well.
And I think it doesn't extend.
We connect with that in a very unconscious way, in a very primeval way of view, until
we start exploring.
And I think part of exploring this, one question we came up with over dinner about, we have
to bring up, is different methodologies, disciplines to study movement.
And I think, for example, the episode you relate, I can think from a scientific explanation,
we can have philosophical ones and phenomenology, but I can think also, for example, like analysis
playing a role or even literature to explore different ways of how that's felt.
And I think, you know, when we try to go through those experiences, sometimes most of us are
lacking in what character articulate exactly what does it mean to me or what's the quality
of it.
And it's developing those tools, those linguistic ability to speak about it and understand it
after the fact if you will.
On the one side, see there is movement and it's richness.
At the same time, I want to understand it, not simply as I move, although I enjoy doing
that, but also articulate it in different ways.
And I think different methodologies and patterns are needed to, especially with complex things
like your experience.
Yes, chill.
Very minimal notion of what dance is, but I've been involved in music since I was about
nine playing the cello.
And I started taking lessons again recently with a 30-something expert and I never liked
to play scales, but now I'm in control of the situation and he teaches what I ask him
about.
And so he said, okay, let's do it.
I mean, he thought I did it, but I avoided it my whole life.
So he said, all right, start on D major, so the first finger on the cello.
And then before you play the next note, hear it and go up the scale.
And no open strings that is, play only notes that require pressure from a digit because
open strings don't train the left hand at all, there's no left hand.
So I did it, I was surprised how in tune, it was in tune.
And I didn't practice D major scale.
And he says, when the top basketball player shoots for the three pointer, he visualizes
the ball going through the net.
And similar to the tennis player or the golf or the sink, but visualizes the ball rolling
into the hole.
What you're doing, he says, is you're suspending your mental interference.
And your body knows very well, your body's done it a thousand a million times.
Let your body do it.
So I assume there's some overlap here.
Very interesting comment, very, yeah, go ahead.
Yeah, well, there's a lot of wisdom in your remarks about how you come back to something
that you haven't done in the past.
And I think, you know, when we all leave this place, I hope you don't think we're talking
only about reflexes and stuff.
I mean, we're really talking about generative, creative movement.
And I think that's really important.
You see what you're talking about in the case of producing an effect in the world in terms
of sound, actually, infants, when they develop to speak, they are doing the same.
You're producing sounds.
And that is lawfully produced by the way your articulators move.
The way you sense your articulators, where your tongue is, and so on.
So there's an intimate connection.
And you would, you see, you never really forget how to speak unless you've had some severe
insult and so on.
So I think it's like that, that these become stabilized.
And how they destabilize then can be part of, you know, producing new sounds as if you would
want to learn a new language, for instance.
There's quite a lot of work again on that, that you're actually building on what you
have and adjusting the dynamics of what you have and the acoustic consequence that those
dynamics produce.
And that's the key aspect, I think.
I would add to that that I think that there is a lot to be said for the imaginative consciousness.
I can describe that in terms of the imaginative consciousness of movement.
But what you're talking about, it seems to me, is on the imaginative consciousness of
sound where what used to be called mental practice actually enhances your performance.
Because the body really does take over and you can, this is an example from movement,
I can remember it from movement classes.
I would imagine myself going through some kind of movement and I knew that this was wrong
imaginatively, you know I had to do it this way.
I could actually correct myself imaginatively and improve whatever I was doing.
But I think what you're saying is that hearing the sound, letting yourself hear the sound
is really going on your bodily felt sense of the sound, just like the bodily felt sense
of the movement and how it, I don't know whether to use the term dynamics there, but it has
a certain kind of quality, the sound has a certain kind of quality and your body knows
that sound already and how to make it come to the fore, how to create it.
I was speaking of visualizing in Seligulum's leading because we tend to think we simply
matching with our mind side, but when I try to visualize different moves in my sports,
I actually feel it through my body.
Yeah, so visualizing in a way throws us off a little bit and trying to think that I can
image and that's what suffices.
So it could be oral, it could be tactile and aesthetic, you know, when I'm trying to think
in the pool how to do certain moves and I visualize it, I do feel this thing in my arms
or the spirit of rivalry, the attention.
So I think there is a richness of interconnection of our senses that we have to pay attention
to.
It's actually very interesting that if you do have a stroke, for instance, and the person
can only move the left hand, say it's a right hemisphere stroke, something like that, and
you say imagine moving your hands together the way we normally do, and if you really
work at that, actually you can show that there's a degree of recovery of function and there's
published research on that.
And there's also a lot of published research that when you imagine to move, many of the
same neural structures are activated and coordinated.
So this is not magic.
Oh.
This is clearly articulated.
My question is actually about what you had mentioned about emotions moving through the
body.
So the movement of a feeling, no, perhaps emotion and feeling are not the same there.
I'm wondering if that's true, then what is the feeling of the movement of a mixed feeling,
like ambivalence or some other sort of maybe that's an emotion?
I was thinking a lot about those sorts of situations because I can envision what you
talk about and I think I've experienced that as well.
I know what it feels like for joy to move through my body or one of the ways, and I
know what it feels like for sadness to move through my body, but I'm not quite sure how
it feels for bitter sweetness or ambivalence or anything like that.
I don't know if that makes sense.
Well, you have to maybe engage in some phenomenological methodology and really not on a lazy Sunday
afternoon, but really this goes into phenomenological analysis, but at least begin by introspecting
as to what your experience actually is.
I mean, when you feel ambivalent about something, what are the tensions that run through your
body, what are the spatial inclinations that you feel to do or not to do?
What is the kind of maybe incipient movements and pauses that you feel inclined toward?
Like there are some kind of temporal aspects to it too.
So if you feel ambivalent, there's a certain kind of ambivalence in terms of changing in
terms of the, that was more or less mentioned in terms of tension, but also in terms of
the way in which you feel impaled toward moving in a certain way spatially or feel more hesitant
or in a slower kind of way.
So in other words, just begin at least by introspecting and seeing.
And actually in a union sense actually too, you went in, I'm not a union analyst at all,
but the whole idea of exploring something through artistic manifestations, you could
even begin by just finding out, just starting moving.
I'm feeling ambivalent.
Do I feel like?
Just to give you something concrete, I'm somebody who is very indecisive.
So Bruce Hehrweiser, Bruce Hehrweiser, I don't know, and I keep going back and forth.
I want to buy, I have money for it in one book and there are two books I really want.
And I'm in the computer screen, I can go back and forth and it's just my body and I feel
this inside of me, physically, this is comfort that pulls me in different ways, that's why
we're speaking that way.
So pay attention to those feelings, the next time you have to choose maybe a shirt to wear
something like that.
Or something else, right?
You chose to go on for tonight.
So try to think, what was happening, how do I feel right now in introspect?
And there are different methodologies that they take you further, you mentioned phenomenology,
they're more complicated, but by paying attention to that or first trying to see, well, what
is it unique about this experience?
That's also common to somebody else who speaks of the same experience as a beyond decisive.
This is what I'm feeling, do you feel this way?
What do you have in common?
It's tried to extrapolate from there as you explore this.
Because I think there's this kind of either our state, which sometimes is great when they
coincide with synergy, sometimes it pulls you apart.
There's two goals, which one do I want, right?
It's like, boy, dance donkey, there is hay on both sides and he does restoration.
We have to know which one to eat.
Anyway, I'll eat with that thought.
There is something I think very nice about being in this, in between place that we use
to see it as negative in a way.
But I think there's also something very enlightened about being in the in between place so that
you can see dispositions, multiple dispositions at the same time.
And those are synergies in themselves.
Those are synergies.
Those are synergies.
I was just going to say.
I mean, Maxine, one of the first times that we interacted was going back to these gates
and actually I was at Yale at the time we could only study finger movements.
And I discovered a kind of transition between anti-phase and then phase switching one night,
thinking about how can my fingers do the walking, you see?
And analogy again.
And then turning that into a real experiment.
But Maxine wrote once that that kind of gate transition, that kind of phase, it turned out
that that was a phase transition, a qualitative change.
And you analogized it with the idea itself.
Ideation is a phase transition.
So you have new things come up.
And that can be actually taken advantage.
You've got co-existing states and then you can create a new thing.
So it can be positive.
Thank you all very much.
Thank you.
You know,
