Welcome to the Hill Xran table and the Director of the Center.
We met this.
Can you hear me now?
Yes.
Okay, I'm Ed Nursecien, the Director of the Hill X Center.
As soon as I finish it, he's not connected.
I can start.
We met today in our Executive Committee Board and discussed the programs for next year and
essentially selected a number of them that we will be organizing.
And so as soon as we have polished it and completed it, I will make sure that they're
on the web, on our website, so that ahead of time you know what are the programs that
we will be having for the year.
We will not have all the participants yet, but you'll certainly know the subject matter.
Today's round table was proposed by a member of our Executive Board, Ellen Gilbert, who
is a librarian and a journalist.
And she will introduce the participants and then make sure that the round table runs
smoothly.
Thank you.
Thank you, Ed, and welcome everybody.
Thank you for coming.
The topic this afternoon is living in difficult times.
And I almost thought that we would have to cancel the whole thing because the first thing
that I brought up on my email this morning was an announcement for the Economist.
They have a special edition on the world ahead, 2023.
Eight ways the world will change in 2023.
So there you have it.
In the meantime, the daily headlines were startling and scary from the start.
U.S. life expectancy plunged in 2020, especially for Black and Hispanic Americans reported
the New York Times.
The pandemic has made homelessness more visible in many American cities.
Noted the Economist.
While the Guardian told us that, quote, the latest UN report is clear.
Climate change is here.
It is a crisis and it's caused by fossil fuels.
The pandemic, violence against people of color, mass shootings in public schools, and the war
in Ukraine have all made for a dispiriting time in our lives.
Almost three years later, our heightened state of anxiety shows no signs of abating.
On one recent day, New York Times columnist Maureen Dowd suggested that, quote, the world
is too scary.
Politics is too creepy, unquote, unquote.
Horror is too real, unquote.
While her colleague David Brooks wrote about, quote, the rising tide of global sadness, unquote.
In that same issue, the announcement of Elon Musk's $44 billion deal to buy Twitter surely
engendered its own kind of unease about the way we live now.
This roundtable discussion will consider the ways in which people in science, politics,
the arts, and everyday life have rallied individually and in groups to meet the challenges of this
particularly difficult time.
We have a remarkable group of panelists this afternoon.
I'll introduce them in alphabetical order with brief descriptions of their work.
There's much, much more to say about each of them, of course.
Their complete biographies are available online.
Please raise your hand so we can recognize you.
John Chun is the founding co-director of KDH Lab at Kenyon College where he has created
the world's first human-centered AI curriculum and has mentored hundreds of projects.
He is currently writing on explainable AI for a special issue of the International Journal
of Digital Humanities.
Professor of Humanities and Comparative Literature, Katherine Elkins, is director of the Integrated
Program in Humane Studies at Kenyon College.
She writes about the age-old conversation between philosophy and literature and the
more recent conversation between AI and the humanities.
Farzad Mahoutian, who is clinical associate professor of global liberal studies at New
York University, has an interdisciplinary background with degrees in both philosophy
and chemistry.
His research focuses on interactions between philosophy, science, and society.
Edward Tanner is an independent writer and speaker at the intersection of science, design,
and culture.
A founding advisor of the Smithsonian's Lemelson Center for the Study of Invention and Innovation,
he is now affiliated with the National Museum of American History as distinguished scholar
and is also a visiting scholar in the Rutgers University Department of History.
Stephen Wein has served at the New York Psychoanalytic Institute as a supervising child and adolescent
analyst, training and supervising analyst, and associate dean for child analysis.
He is a member of the Center for Advanced Psychoanalytic Studies and a life fellow of
the American Psychiatric Association and the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry.
John Williams is an associate professor of English, film, and media at Yale University.
His academic work has focused on international histories of Buddhism, technological innovation,
and the perceived difference of racial and cultural otherness.
Some questions to help guide the conversation.
What are the issues and what are the underlying or less apparent issues we should be considering?
How are they being addressed and how should they be addressed?
Talk about the role of media.
Is this time different from the past?
Is there a role for public intellectuals?
Finally, the philosopher Walter Kauffman described existentialism as a philosophy about
quote, dread, despair, death, and don'tlessness.
The basic idea he believed is to recognize how treacherous and unknowable your path is
and then to continue on anyway.
So where do we go from here?
I would like to start.
I'll start.
I'll start on where the issues are, what the issues are, underlying issues, and so it's
going to be just from one perspective on that.
And to encapsulate the whole thing, I call it the black hole with capitalism.
And by that, I mean that whatever innovations are introduced into the world, say, green
technology, there's a good one.
It can help it get sucked into the big machine that camels and they believe that it will
be taken advantage of as an opportunity to create a profit.
And that pretty much goes very well.
It's a very simple line on what capitalism has to do with the old fraud and scorpion thing.
I'm a scorpion.
I have to do this.
And so it's things that fraud that's helping across the river and they both sink.
So then being the case, I keep trying to think of is there an alternative social mode or
is there an alternative economy that could coexist with capitalism?
And I just can't see that it could.
Capitalism kind of feels like a living organism that is evolved and it's very happy with the
environment and how it can use the environment.
And so it will just absorb anything that comes along.
If that's the case, then we should not be handing over the framing of these big problems,
like climate, to the very same people and very same ways of thinking, I should say,
but generated the problem.
So if we are unwilling to hand over the framing of the problem to the people,
to the ways of thought that created the problem, then what is the alternative?
And I'll just end on this point, the alternative would have to be something like
non-scientific thinking, non-technological thinking, non-economic based thinking.
That leaves it pretty open.
These are all non-words, but what we could think about, it's not that those things won't have
roles, but they should not be the guiding feature in how to frame the problem.
So that leaves it to humanities, for example, to public intellectuals, for example,
to really human beings who want to deeply engage with the problem.
So it sort of reminds me of that famous quote by Frederick James,
in that it's become easier to imagine the end of the world than it is to imagine a modest change
in capitalist production and the way that we manage the economy.
And there's something about the black hole image that generates a kind of singularity
to our future logical speculation, that if that's the case, that we can only imagine
a future that is in some sense, over-determined by global capitalism,
then I think that that does limit somewhat the options that we're willing to take on.
I like that the program asks us to think about living in difficult times.
Times is a plurality.
It implies the possibility of multiple futures that might emerge.
And there's a problem with multiple futures because the idea historically of thinking
about multiple futures is coincident with the rise of global capitalism.
But in some ways global capitalism, and particularly the forces generating the climate crisis,
want for us to think of multiple futures as being possible.
Because the climate crisis is also a singularity.
It's something that it's a computational model that implies there is a future coming,
and it's hot, and it's fiery.
And so I want to formulate the question as saying,
how can we imagine multiple futures outside of the black hole of capitalism?
Because in a sense that's where people used to think in the 60s.
It wasn't over-determined and thought of as a final solution
that capitalism would necessarily be a black hole in the only way to think of things.
What is interesting, we were just two weeks ago showing our students an ultra-person model.
So we did an agent model where each agent was altruistic.
You had different agents in an environment.
Every time an agent encountered another agent, it would give it a dollar if it had it.
And even under these circumstances, what happens is you get this emergent power law inequality distribution.
So if you, we do this because we teach a lot of humanity's students that the baseline condition is not a quality,
even if every agent is acting altruistically.
So a lot of our students feel disempowered. They feel hapless.
They feel like there's no future for them.
And so I think what we have to do, it starts upstream. It starts with education.
It starts educating the next generation to realize that there is a natural condition.
There's a natural baseline. There's an aspirational society we would like to build.
And if you leave capitalism to its own ends, we will wind up evolving a very nasty, brutish-type society.
So I do agree, it's funny, there is no capitalism in the program.
And I think independently all three of us from film, chemistry, philosophy, and AI have evolved and realized we're all embedded in this matrix of capitalism that has this irresistible force.
I'd like to underline what you said and say some things that are really going to upset people a little.
Just got an email from the American Academy of Child and Adolescence of Hyattree a few days ago.
There was a huge study in the state of Illinois over the last few years from something like 2015 to 2019 pre-coded.
It's a 59% increase in emergency visits by kids for suicidal ideation.
That's before the public. Since color, there's been further spikes.
And there's an article in the Washington Post from a few days ago that said that at Yale, there has been a 90% increase in demands for mental health services by students since 2015.
So if you want to know how this is affecting people, one is that a lot of people don't think that they have a future
and don't think that they can cope.
It's also the Academy of Child Psychiatry and the American Academy of Pediatrics issued a joint statement that there is a crisis in mental health.
Now, one can think of all of this medically that they need services, but I think we all understand that this is coming from something.
But it's very serious.
I'm curious what do you feel are some of the major drivers of that?
I mean, certainly teaching kids at the state to pursue every day, but what would be some of your ideas about describing that?
You know, it's hard to know from seeing patients because they talk about their personal individual situations.
And so when people ask me, do you see any changes because of COVID, my reaction is no, it's just that everybody's worse.
And everybody's more anxious.
And maybe it's because of climate, because a number of kids have said to me, very matter of factly, humanity won't exist in a few decades.
And they're not so sure there is a future for them.
I don't know that they think about this all day long.
I think all day long, they think about whether or not they're popular and whether or not they're, you know, they're going to be rejected by someone they want to go out with.
But there's an underlying feeling that things are bad.
I also think that COVID has been devastating because of the social isolation that people underwent.
I heard from a high school student that at his school, when students write it anonymous feedback to the teachers about their classes,
there is a nasty list of their reports that you never existed before.
I think if you think about what it's like to go to school in your pajamas in bed, watching your teacher on television,
you forget that you're writing about a human being who might be hurt by these statements.
And lastly, I think you talk about capitalism.
I don't remember, 39 years ago, kids talking a lot about wanting to make money or being afraid that they wouldn't.
And it comes up all the time now.
One kid said, I want to have vast wealth.
I said, why do you have to have vast wealth? But this kind of thing, a much greater awareness of the disparities between rich and poor
in a privileged population and a lot of anxiety that they're not going to be able to make it.
So I don't think it's one thing.
But it's certainly the temperature is way up and it's very hard to make a referral to a child therapist these days.
Nobody has time.
One thing that they're living with that we didn't is the acceleration of social media and the sort of technological extension of themselves
and so many potential, you know, harmful, mentally challenging situations.
I even think that that is partly a symptom of why class evaluations have become so aggressive,
is that they no longer think of them as reports to our supervisors, but as reports to each other.
Their Amazon reviews, they're speaking to each other about, well, this professor was this way and that's been the tone that I've seen
and just in my career as well.
But when I think about social media, I wonder about the...
There's so much power that I'm evoking here.
The accelerating power of it to bring everything into the moment, right?
Douglas Rushcock wrote a book called Present Shock, which was kind of a riff on Alvin Tuffler's old book Future Shock
and the idea that real-time media, Facebook feeds, everything is an attempt to compress everything into an absolute presentism
that makes everything feel like now.
Everything is now.
But what's curious about that is that in terms of mental health, one of the proposed panacea's is mindfulness,
is to live in the now, to be in the present moment, right?
To simply occupy the present moment and exist, sit with one's thoughts and watch them and not allow the future
or historical events to influence one's mental health.
And I find that a really curious dilemma that particularly kids today have to deal with is that their told technology
allows you to be in a kind of condensed, absolute present.
And that's what's causing so much anxiety.
And yet at the same time, mindfulness practitioners will tell them, just be here now, just be in the moment.
When I think, in fact, what really might actually alter the conditions of it is to think historically, to think
futureologically, to be able to imagine a future that's not so terrifying, right?
On the subject, by the way, the feedback actually reminds me of one of the features of our age, which is that there is
constant negative feedback.
And it's something I've been studying in the media, not only in the social media, but in the mainstream media.
I recently reviewed a book on the use of metrics in newspapers, both tabloids and the New York Times.
And one of the very interesting things about the measurement of rear participation is that the way I phrase it,
in arrangement is engagement.
That is, there is a bias toward getting people angry.
And that, thus, I think, promoting anxiety.
And the angrier, the more they participate, and the more they participate, the other angry people chime in.
So that does become a feedback loop.
And this is especially true in social media.
Now, I have to say that I am maybe one of the few qualified pro-capitalist in the room.
So you can cancel me if you like, but I have to say that straight out.
And one of the reasons for that is to see what happened to the socialist regimes in large countries in the 20th and 21st centuries.
How the Soviet Union, for example, treated the environment, how they treated human rights, what's happening in China now.
So I'm not a total defender of capitalism, quite the contrary, but I think there is a need for balance.
The social media, though, really are exploiting that.
And they're also promoting the addiction of children, which I think is a really terrible thing.
And this also extends, for example, to online casinos, which are not near toward people under 18,
but are certainly exploiting young adults who are not yet really mature, mature judges.
So I think that one of the things that we've gone through a lot of things, some of which might not be easily addressed,
but I think one of the interesting things is what can be done to break this feedback circuit.
I love that. That's great. Going for the breaking of the feedback circuit, that really works in dynamic systems.
That's the point of manipulation that you can bring to bear.
Going back one step to what you said, it reminded me, I kept writing notes to myself to add the word consumer capitalism to capitalism,
which really intensifies and alters capitalism.
So just as I said, science, technology, these things have to be involved in the next steps.
So does capitalism, I believe, because it is, like I said, sort of a natural, it's a naturally evolved dynamism in the human world.
And it's a very good at surviving. It alters the environment for its own advantage, like organisms do and groups of organisms do.
So it's going to be around, so it certainly has a place.
Consumer capitalism has this more malignant thing like you were talking about the promoting addiction, the behavior in children.
And doing that in a variety of ways, whether it's acquiring things or just acquiring points.
And the problem with that, or the beauty of it too, if you're into, I'm going too fast here, generative, what would GANs like keep?
A generative adversarial networks.
Adversarial networks.
Generative adversarial networks.
These are self-learning systems in AI.
All of these things, and the consumer capitalist approach to children, is reward structures.
So a lot of AI just functions on getting rewards, all video games function on getting rewards.
And that really slants everything.
Hitting that somewhere, I'm not sure where, would alter things.
It's such a natural thing though, to seek rewards and get them.
One really good example was, at one point when I was writing my most recent book, I was interested in debunking the GPS program waves.
And so I joined waves, and then we got points for a very mildly drive, and so I found myself really determined to become royalty-wazer.
There was no money in it.
There was no publicity value. I couldn't list that on my CD.
But it was somehow something that I still, it's still hard for me to pass a service station without punching in the price of gas.
And so I was able to experience myself knowing how absurd it is.
I was still able to experience the power of the application, so I can only imagine what it is like for kids, and young adults.
I just wanted to make a disclaimer. I'm a full believer in capitalism. I did startups in Silicon Valley.
I was part of that utopian, kind of like changing the world, with building the future.
And as a technology, like Escape in the Lab, and for example, AI in the last ten years has become like, it's escape the gravitational pull of being dependent on federal and academic loans, and it's out there in the world, making decisions who gets hired, who gets killed, who gets the loan, who gets sentenced advisory.
It began to dawn on us that capitalism is a very beautiful, powerful thing, but uncontrolled, unrestrained, it's the perfect psychopath.
Because people don't realize that monopoly was designed in the Great Depression as an anti-capitalist.
And the lesson to learn was that in the end, one person owned all the properties, and everybody else owned nothing.
And so it's why we have regulations, why we have food safety rules, why we have all of these things to kind of restrain capitalism.
And I think our future leaders, people were teaching, today have to be educated with a technological framework that goes deeper to understand kind of where the pressure points are, and where is the justice, where is the wisdom of the humanities, our lived experience.
How can we inject that, put that into our social media, put that into our algorithms, put them into our news feeds?
One of the problems is they're extremely pessimistic. They feel that these problems are so complex that actually doing anything to affect these complex systems is next to the hospital.
As a teacher of this next generation, it worries me that they will get us as the ones who have really messed it up. And so there's a kind of skepticism that we might have, which I think is someone just that we could possibly help them figure out this mess.
And we've also had some of them say, I'm sick and tired of being told, don't worry, you guys will figure this out. Your generation is going to take it out.
So I think part of what we're dealing with are complex systems that are very hard to figure out how to alien in ways that will actually affect change, complex systems in which they feel they may only see a small piece.
They're very idealistic, and yet they feel they do not have the tools to make a difference.
I've also just said a little bit what John is saying, looking at the longer than you, I do think there is something new in the past few centuries about our rhetoric about we keep the kid out of the house, though we make your life, you decide exactly who you are and you can be whoever you want, good luck.
And if you think of most of the human history, we have evolved to be a part of a tribe, to know our place, to know what our life will look like, and we talk about all the opportunities of making themselves and finding one's way.
But as someone who is a scholar in the 19th century literature, we see young people in novels by Fauver and Dickens coming to the sea and making their way.
And I just want to remind people that many of those stories are extremely dark, right? Those stories are not all happy stories about how great it is, right?
So we have stories and our paths about stories going abroad, of people trying to find their way and finding that they don't find their way, a lost illusion.
So we know already that this is difficult. And then we huckle that with young generation who may not be able to afford to live in urban areas where they want to live, who has to take jobs to make money to kind of even be able to live in these areas.
I just think the pressures are enormous. And we're teaching students who in previous generations might have been able to contribute in place that would have really benefited society, that now feel the need to make money to pay rent in wherever they want to go.
Well, if you graduate from college and you want to live in New York, forget it. You either would have with mom and dad, which brings you right back to somebody else doing your laundry, or you move out with 25 roommates deep in the outer furrow.
And, you know, certainly when I was in college, we were told to find your passion and find a way to make a living doing what you most love.
And what happens if you don't have a passion? And I think most people don't have a passion. They just sort of want to get by. And then they're totally lost.
Especially as you say, because people are saying, go find yourself. Let them know what happened.
Go find yourself in the context of a society that seems to have evolved to a point where we can't imagine something beyond what we're hurtling towards. And I even want to suggest that some of the language we've been using, I feel, is a little bit almost verges on a religion of capitalism.
When we talk about it being an organism, that's something that is just natural to the systems of human growth, that it escapes from the lab, that it's like something that has sort of necessarily evolved from the cosmos in a way where, at least rhetorically,
giving in to the idea that capitalism is this natural force of the universe. And I think that that's a religious idea. It's not something that has always accompanied human history. Right? Global capitalism is a fair, in terms of, you know, human evolution, a fairly recent innovation.
It's a new religion. It's a new religion. Exactly. And if we talk about it in those terms, then I think we're contributing to this fatalism that people feel when they're coming into adulthood
and they're told to follow your passion, but it's within these very overt
religions. Religiosity is a system of structures and rights and behaviors. It doesn't necessarily something that one believes necessarily. It's a whole ideological system.
I think maybe I understand what you're saying is that there's a choice. We can shape our destiny, but we can be passive agents, be molded, like play. Or we can actively make choices about schools. All of these things are distortion of capitalism, right?
Schools, fire departments, police departments, public roads, you know, all of these. And we make these compromises in order to have a civil society. One word of humans can thrive and survive. And it seems increasingly, I think maybe I'm interpreting here.
When I see religiosity, I do see, like, this is one question. Now, that needs to be questioned because we have to realize we live in a society that's constructed of many different choices, an amalgam of religions and cultures and value systems.
So that's one thing we try to tell our students is don't be so passive. You know, it's part of the hopelessness. I think comes from this. I'm hapless. I have no agency.
And I'm alone.
That's the other point.
If you think about it from a game theory kind of perspective, we're in this game and there are certain rules. And it's not always easy to say, I'm not going to play the game.
So we see it not just with students who are trying to invite them into colleges and then playing all these games to get to college. And then they're in the next ocean round of the game, right?
I mean, you can say you don't believe in it and you don't want to play that game, but figuring out you would almost need a large number of people to talk out.
You really can't opt out of the game as an individual very easily. Very difficult.
And it's the individualism in some ways that gets us here. Follow your passion, be an individual. These are forms of neoliberal subjectivity that allow us to, or that force us to approach a social situation and say, it's up to me to find a way to live with this.
I'm not part of a collective that is learning to shape society. I have to develop the forms of self-help and self-improvement and refining my soul and subjectivity in a way to succeed in this high stakes, difficult time.
And I think that's part of the problem is that we're sort of structuring success and subjectivity according to like, it's up to you individually to change. It's how well do you recycle. That's how well we'll save the planet.
Whereas these are actually massive systemic problems that we're dealing with that would require structural change.
And I think one of my dreams I would hope to see by then in my life is capitalism is an amazing engine. I don't think humanity has ever created such a system that can just galvanize and mobilize humanity to solve things at such scale.
But we have to take reins of that. It can't be less loose. I would hope that there's some sort of people coming together not being so atomized by technology or social media or political affiliations.
Whatever it is that's the violence. We have to come together and kind of cooperate because it will be a struggle. It's a balance between hopelessness and awareness of how the system is rigged and how we write it.
And when I say great, I don't mean like there's so many people twisting their beards and smoke filled backgrounds. It's the invisible hand of capitalism doesn't require a conspiracy. It's just a natural force like gravity. It's very powerful.
We're in the middle of a crisis, you raise them the word neoliberalism, which depassinates me because neoliberalism is the only movement that they're not speak its name. That liberals, conservatives, socialists, communists, fascists, they all tend to describe themselves with the words that others use.
But neoliberal really hate the word neoliberal. And even though no conservatives will acknowledge it being no conservatives. I think that's part of a crisis.
I wouldn't say it's the crisis of capitalism as such because when you look at the metamorphoses of capitalism and the metamorphoses into the corporatist world of today, it's really been a change in a change not only in the degree but in time.
For example, consider the idea of difficult times. Now in 1914, there was a strike in Colorado of miners. And the mine was owned by the Rockefellers. And the Rockefellers sent in essentially armed troops to engage with the strikers.
And many strikers were killed then. So this was capitalism in the early 19th century. And this is one of the reasons for the Rockefellers establishing a foundation.
So you didn't have a commemoration of the Ludlow strike. You had all kinds of news of the wonderful philanthropic Rockefellers.
Not that today's Rockefellers can be blamed for the Ludlow strike. But there was, I think the turmoil of that period was the beginning of a metamorphosis of capitalism.
And there's something like today's corporate life. And what you're talking about the way people are thinking about their future is really the way that corporations think, including universities.
There's a very strong parallel, the structure of universities, university departments, what it takes to get ahead with the structure in for profit corporations.
And I can say this as an outsider, as somebody who went independent 30 years ago and has even been called a public intellectual.
That isn't a phrase I like because I'm really a private intellectual. I don't get any salary from any age or anything like that.
So I'm a private intellectual. But I think that what we've been talking about is really a loss of legitimacy, a set of institutions that seem to be doing very, very well through the Reagan era, through the Clinton era,
through the Bush and Obama administration. And now there is an almost universal sense of disillusionment without, as you were noting, any sense of what could supplant it.
Because if you look, for example, at European social democracy, the Swedes are letting ultra right wing parties into their government.
Sweden was one of the, what you pointed to, enlightened social democracy. You always thought of Sweden. And now Sweden is suffering from the same kinds of stresses that we are.
And I don't have a solution, but I think, to me, that's where that's the form of capitalism, the form of corporate life.
And of course, the reaction against higher education is also part of that. And the fact that so much of Donald Trump's support was based in the wrong people who did not have college educations.
And that proved to be the best predictor of votes, which is why the polls were wrong.
So we have a broad institutional crisis now. And yet there's also the sense that only institutions can deal with climate change and mental illness and all of the other disturbing trends we've been talking about.
And so I remember the definition that a friend gave me long ago in Harvard, he said, he gave me the definition that an intellectual is somebody who believes that one, the world is run by fools, and two, I could do no better.
Fools, yeah. That's always a good place to start. I mean, are there any outward person here? I think he was very brilliant and wise, and he used the word, possibleism.
And he believed that whatever plans we make, whatever. Sorry. Should I start again? We're talking about Albert Hirschman and possibleism. I love that word.
And he believed that whatever plans we make, that there should be a hopefulness in them and possibility and in the sense that things can change.
So, the other mother rate phrase, by the way, that the hiding hand as a parallel to Ed Smith's individual hand. And the hiding hand, I'm sure you're familiar with it. The hiding hand is the idea that we start things without knowing how difficult they're going to be.
If we'd known in advance, we wouldn't have started them. But once we're committed to them, we find ways to get them done. And I can tell you as an independent writer.
I knew Hirschman and that kind of buoyed me up as I was when I was early in the process.
That speaks to the power of vision, though, of imagining something that, like you're right, if you had anticipated all of the trials and tribulations of a given endeavor, you may have never decided to do it.
But because you had that imagination, you thought, I can see something that I could accomplish here, and you undertake it. And in the process, it's terrible.
But you do it. And I think that's part of what's possible is so interesting, is that you have to be able to imagine some kind of thing, even if you can't find a historical precedent for Colorado in the 20s, I guess not.
But if you can just imagine something, that seems to be the powerful path to get on to.
And it's okay to make mistakes.
I think you have to imagine that you have to have the experience of succeeding at something. And having done something hard and gotten through it.
And it can be something very small and individual, or I think we're talking in a much larger context of society.
But once you've done something right, you can believe that you could do it again.
And I think we have to think about that in terms of how kids are raised and how they're educated, but they have to experience struggle and success.
Well, I think recently everyone's experienced a lot of struggle, whether it's internal, psychologically, or external, or the pandemic, or the news of the shootings.
And all of the targeting of different ethnic groups, huge amount of struggle that I think both certainly all the statistics you cited, young people are not able to deal with that.
They feel with it. They face it in some ways.
But it makes me want to go to that next set of problems, the polarization, the polarity in our culture today, in our well around the world, actually.
It comes from, well, let's just look at this country. We have this huge right wing, left wing thing going on. And the lives of, I'll try right wing white supremacy, that kind of thing.
Looking at it sympathetically, which I try to do a bunch of times.
It's kind of like, you have to get over a little pump. And then there's, oh, obviously, how I can see where they're going.
It's based on a tremendous fear, which does have an actual basis in reality, which is basically that, you know, a racist mix.
And that's basically the fear that's been expressed in every epic going back thousands of years of religious history.
Forget that for now. But right now, I think the thing that everyone has in common is that fear.
So it's the fear facing the other. And if we just put it in those terms, dealing with the other, the non-self, the non-me is at the core of a lot of these social problems that we're having.
And not the techniques, like this is aside from whole capitalism discussion. But that's something that has a lot of psychological bearing and social bearing.
And it also is a product that's a lot of interesting, therefore a lot of interesting illusion-making and believing.
But also, it seems like with some of the interesting psychological tricks that people here in the audience, in this group probably know,
that they can be dismantled by some skillful means of novels, imagination, fiction, and some evidence, just purple.
So that sort of finding the common core, which is this fear about future, this fear about this other group, how they're going to just totally mess things up.
And a number of other things could be a good starting point for discussion at least. How institutions come into that.
I agree that between talking about how we're back to this sort of, it's all on you. It's an individual quest, the hero's quest.
On the other hand, we know how institutions can, it's a systemic issue, so it's not an individual problem.
But we're kind of bouncing back forward between those two things, not trusting institutions, being too scared as individuals.
Anyways, somewhere in there, there's some work that could be done in that nugget of fear that we share with the other side, where the other side is.
I'd like to offer a counterpoint because this happens, this is recopigulating what happens in our course, what we talk about in bio and politics weapons and AI.
Is that there is hope? I mean, I would recalibrate back to when I was a child, the Cold War was hanging over all heads.
We thought we would all be inundated, now I'm destroying a nuclear holocaust.
And that humanity has collectively been able to avert that, gives me great hope.
The fact that, for example, I grew up in Dubuque, Iowa, and they had cross-burnings as recently as the 90s, 80s, 90s.
I've been back there in the integration. It's much more integrated, it's much more accepting.
As bad as it is today, it was much worse when I was in a small, rust belt town in the 70s growing up.
And so I think you have to give humanity credit. I mean, it's the only thing that gets you up in the morning, right?
That there is hope. And I think sometimes we have to kind of balance out our, because that pessimism, that weights of all the world and how bad things are going, can lead to passivity in action.
And resignation. And that's something we have to fight, mightily, against. I think.
I would speak to this polarization issue as well, which I think is extremely important right now.
And part of the reason why it's difficult to be optimistic about things is just how siloed people are in their media theoretical bubbles.
We used to think that the internet and all of the sort of the rise of blogs and all of these ways of disseminating more and more information would make information free.
We would all be able to access the same thing and we do.
But the algorithms that generate the anger are the ones that keep us in these feedback loops where the anger accelerates and accelerates.
And one of the things that I've noticed that's so dangerous about, for example, Fox News, is that they've perfected the art of what in rhetoric is called the prolepsis.
The prolepsis is that part of an argument where you anticipate in advance objections that will come from the other side.
And part of their rhetoric is to sort of prepare their audience for potential evidence or objections or things that they'll know.
They know that their audience will encounter so that when someone who watches religiously a show like that can come and to speak with someone.
And as they're speaking, they're not really listening. They're preparing in advance the thing that they're going to say next.
And so whatever logic or evidence or very good arguments you might have, they're prepared already with something which means they're not listening.
And what I've found is the only way to actually disarm that rhetorical radioactive core is to listen, to stop and to listen to the Thanksgiving dinner next week.
You just, the uncle, you just listen. Because if you come prepared with arguments, they will have been as part of their, and it's not just Fox News, it's the Facebook algorithms and Instagram and all of the things that circulate their own views back to them at higher and higher volumes
that allows them to stop listening. And so the only way I've discovered to sort of like, let's stop this, is to just really let them let the steam blow off and listen and listen.
And then you can begin to like have these kinds of conversations. But it's difficult to listen sometimes.
I wonder if we've talked about institutions. I wonder if any of you have anything to say about small groups, about the power of small groups.
There have been several books recently called that have been spoke about how small groups can elaborate and rally and really have an impact.
I think that's good.
It just reminds me of, I'm trying to, I'm struggling for the term, but basically the idea is that science strives for universal laws and universal techniques and so forth.
However, with more attention being paid to say micro climates and micro this and that, basically an awareness of complex systems, we see that local dynamics or local situations are very specific.
And the scientific thing to do is to just come up with something that works there, studying everything we can about it, rather than trying to impose some general way to do every neighborhood, each neighborhood is different.
So I think that's becoming acknowledged as a way of doing science for the last of these 30 years and here and there and personal medicine, personalized medicine is one version of that.
So that comes to mind as like definitely a cogent way to do things.
Conceptually speaking, actually carrying that out, implementing that. I know nothing there. I'm all yours for that.
I mean, certainly we have network theory where we can model how ideas spread and many times it's counterintuitive. Certainly small groups can spread these ideas and having students learn to model these and figure out how to spread ideas.
It's great. I mean, when you're on social media, you talked about the world of intellectuals. There are intellectuals who have all the followers and who have these massive networks.
And it can seem kind of like those are the people with the megaphone.
On the other hand, I kind of wonder how you can be on social media all day and still have time to stay complete.
I'm not quite sure. They manage it somehow, but it does seem like it really won't work.
But one of the things that's been interesting that we do with students working on social media is you'll see these people who seem to have a lot of power, but in fact they're following a very small network.
And you're not really looking at those main megaphones. You're looking at the small network.
So for example, right now our students are looking at the very few numbers of people that AOC and Marjorie Taylor are following.
And in fact, there are a few people that they both follow. And there's this kind of network behind them.
And so what are these smaller networks doing and how could we maybe be watching these smaller networks that are joining people who are really different?
So I think that there are, we're beginning to develop ways to look at these smaller networks, but it's really kind of an infancy and understand how smaller networks might spread ideas or have some kind of impact.
But you live in a smaller network and I think that's one example. If you think about the way the world is, the divide between the college educated world and the non-college educated world that we've seen in these elections,
the college educated world are going to wonderful colleges and wonderful private schools and wonderful magnet schools where all of these progressive ideas are just part of life.
Certainly when I hear kids talk about their friends, I have no way of knowing if their friends, what race their friends are, whether their friends have two moms, two dads, one mom and an Asian kid.
It's just not interesting to these kids. And certain kinds of ideas of racial tolerance and religious tolerance, they don't believe in tolerance because they don't think there's anything to tolerate.
They're just people. I think this is a fantastic change that's happened in the course of all of our lifetimes where it's unimaginable that it wouldn't be at least worthy at mention.
Not discrimination, but just at mention. I think the same thing is true with environmental attitudes, with all sorts of things.
The world, coupled with scientific advances in medicine and technology, the world is a fantastically wonderful place in very small privileged groups such as an elite, tiny college that you guys live in.
And I think that's where a lot of change is possible. The problem is it's not spreading out.
And we have this going on at the same time, that there's this fantastic tilt to the right and to really reactionary, very primitive ideas.
I think that's part of the challenge.
There are also some other elements. So we're in a county that is red and voted from and are part of a network there as well. It's very different.
And it's very interesting to watch that environment because there are plenty of people who live their life, who've never gone on an airplane, who choose to take less prestigious jobs to have time to raise their children, to spend time every Sunday for family dinner.
And then you have this other value system, which is work 80 hours a week, be successful on an international scale.
And it's also easy to see this other culture. And it actually reminds me very much of my experience working in Prague under the Czech and Slovak military right after the revolution.
And yes, there were problems with communism. I also worked with soldiers who'd been kicked out because they had spoken out against the Velvet Revolution.
But on the other hand, people emphasized family. All these things now that we know are really important for happiness, right?
Spending time in the country, hiking. Very little money, right? But friends, connections, family.
Some of these things that our vision of success has kind of thrown away as being important.
So somehow we have to figure out how to have a life that has all of these values, right?
There was some statistics floating around about 20, 30 years ago, the average college male had about three, five friends, and now they have one, zero friends.
And I think part of it's technology has atomized us. The opportunities when you jump to a different city to get a promotion, you leave everyone behind.
And so your idea about organizing on a smaller scale as agents have changed, not as hapless individuals who can't move the needle in any possible way, and not as a broad base, overly ambitious kind of who will change it on a national level from the top down, but as small smallerizations.
And you asked about an example, I would say, again, this is the power of capitalism.
When you get energized people in a startup that all are on the same page, it's incredible what they can accomplish.
I mean, what they can invent, how productive they can be. And you can see that on small medical teams, or you could see it in Silicon Valley, you could see it, you know, people starting a newspaper, anything they put their minds to.
The problem is, is how do you turn, how do you scale that up, so it starts to affect the wider culture and not just the immediate vicinity around them.
It was a, you were asked about the Czech Republic who reminded me of my visit to Moscow in 1988, and the waning, well, in the last years of the Soviet Union, where Paris-Storaka made it possible to meet with people.
And one of the things that I noticed was that the still oppressive nature of Soviet reality really created a very vibrant culture of personal friendship and small groups.
It was really, you know, the way I expressed it at the time was that, whereas in the West, in the West, communism, in the West, the market economy had destroyed the bourgeoisie,
like those bourgeois values, whereas those values of bourgeois utopians around 1900 had been kind of encapsulated by the Soviet state.
And what you were left with, you couldn't really be an entrepreneur, you couldn't organize politically, you couldn't dissent, there weren't even token opposition parties as there were in the former German Democratic Republic.
But what you could do is meet with your friends where you could pursue photography, you could pursue art, you could discuss philosophy.
In that sense, the private life of the Soviet intelligentsia was a weird sort of utopia, and that impression really stayed with me on visiting people in their apartments.
Great, so we went on our future after a grand impact.
I know it was really bad.
The difficulties of this is that, I mean, in all of the things that we just imagined about the power of startups and the energy of like what these small groups of people can do is that quite often we're talking about the sort of elite powers that sort of generate.
The startup in Silicon Valley is a very good example.
It's like a lot of energy, a lot of excitement.
We have this idea, we're going to implement it.
And I'm sure that that's almost like a spiritual experience for many of those people.
It's very powerful, feels like the cosmos is working through them.
But for the 18-year-old factory worker in China who's actually going to work to implement those particular ideas, the excitement just isn't there.
It's just not like, but that's actually the same thing.
We're talking about the same thing, right?
So I think there's actually a pretty good direct relation between the college-educated voters and the non-college-educated voters and the kind of work that those people are engaged in and the fears about work disappearing in the United States because of offshoring.
The fears about multiculturalism because of what it does to jobs for white, you know, American working class voters.
The power of work as something that we all require, of work that allows us to flourish and to feel like we're a person, a soul, like that that's work is so important to that.
It's as important as whatever hobbies or, you know, arts or things that one pursues, I think.
And that's one of our dilemmas here, is that work in the United States has become either a rarefied and sort of information work or it's dehumanizing, humiliating work or it's been directed offshore.
It's also has only for a long time has been a big difference between a European and American society. The French are really don't know what to make of Americans kind of announcing what they do for a living when they're introduced and in Europe.
That's not what really defines you, what defines you as your interests, your hobbies, your reading. It's really your whole personality and your job is something that lets you make a living.
Yeah, I'm a little bit of Max Weber on this that we do this to that work will fulfill some kind of spiritual role. And, you know, I wonder how really possible that is for most of the young people.
And when you talk about students and say find your passion, I feel like we're kind of insisting to them that they find a job that will fulfill the spiritual function.
And it might be better to create a quality of life that doesn't depend on work to provide so much of that for the vast majority of people.
Seems to me there is also this issue of using fear in order to get something done that parents use fear with their kids to have them behave the right way. And it seems to me the media and so on use fear to get us to do the right thing.
So they make us be afraid of COVID so we get vaccinated. And they feel that the more they make us afraid, the more they give us the number of people who have died, the number of people in ICU's, how we got to get all the military boats around New York City so that we have enough hospital beds.
Then we will do the right thing, stay home, put a mask. And the same is true, for example, with climate change. That if we don't do it, the end is there, we are all going to.
But why isn't it possible to also look at it differently and say science has always been able to make progress and we will also make progress in terms of understanding climate change.
And we will institute the things that have to be instituted in order not to have climate change. We have had epidemics before in the world. We've had pandemics before in the world.
We have survived it and we will survive these two important that you do this or this or that. But rather than using anything positive and reassuring, it seems that the conviction is that getting people frightened gets you to your
goal much better than feeling but then reassuring them.
There is also the fact that when people have tried publications that do this, that present the most hopeful possible news, they are not commercially successful.
Well, what device?
I mean, let me think of what you were telling us a bit earlier that some of these programs that kids go on TikTok and so on, that they are designed to create this stress because this stress makes you stay on the site longer, therefore they can have more ads and therefore they can have better revenue
than if they didn't make you distressed.
So, what they found is that when you elicit negative emotions like anger or jealousy, hatred, they will stay and they will generate more revenue for Facebook or Twitter or whatever. And if you make them happy, they'll go out and play with their dogs or their relatives.
So, it's all in the economic and it's again, there's no people doing this, it's just the algorithm optimizing for revenue.
And where were the people trained who devised these algorithms?
And they come from the universities. They are part of this expansion of natural science and social science. In fact, one of the most interesting things about conservatism about Reaganism was that Ronald Reagan originally did not really leave the government.
He originally did not really care that much about what was happening at Berkeley, but his campaign backers signed a contract with some social psychologists in the Cal State system.
And they did surveys and they revealed that California working class voters were really upset that these students were shutting down this great university that they paid their taxes for.
And he made that a pillar of his campaign was elected governor and then you know the rest.
So, here was my specialty is unintended consequence. So, here was this unintended consequence of 1950s and 1960s liberalism expanding this wonderful university system.
It was really like it created its own nemesis indirectly.
Oh, hey, where are you? Yes, exactly. Exactly. Yes.
This is the thing that interdisciplinary is really great. We should, humanities, sciences, what that would do would be to more quickly make a ruthless, better, more effective game to do this with everything.
And we're psychological insight and we can really go after it. It's being done already. It was, it was, you know, it was done by the Cambridge Analytica, it was all done by all those companies.
So then let's go back to my first point. We can't hand over the framing of this issue, how to approach it to the same people who can harvest it so well.
And so who else is there? I mean, what else is there? What is there? The artist is right. And then of course they can be sort of like sucked into the machine as well after they get, you know, popular.
Is there anyone left? Anyway, that's my, that's where I was.
Is there any other modality to think about things? I'll quote Isabel Stangers here. It was a, it was a great intellectual.
She basically sort of wants to bring that Gaia and say Gaia is an intrusion the way the old Greek gods were before they could, before they became judges for good and evil.
There's just a force of nature and it's not after you. It doesn't want to hurt you. It's not into vengeance, but it's there and that's real.
There's going to be no profit from trying to do the best you can while the crisis goes down because Gaia doesn't care.
Gaia is just going to do that thing that it's going to do when things get out of balance and in temperate the way we're going.
So it's a different frame of thinking. It's kind of mythological, but it's also terribly effective and convincing.
And finally, because it's holistic, it doesn't advocate going for the parts first the way we usually do.
As soon as you go for the parts, you've kind of shrunk it into something different than what it was.
You can make those parts very effective because we know how to do that, but then you've lost the whole.
So coming in with Gaia and staying with the whole as a lead concept of framing becomes one way to begin talking about the alternative, I think.
One reason for the delay in addressing climate change was that in the 1960s and 70s, people saw it coming, but there was also this idea of the Earth as a homoestatic system.
And so the Earth would find a way to kind of neutralize that.
And so we didn't have to worry. Everything is going to work itself out through this balancing system.
And it turned out to be wrong.
No, it turned out to be true. It's just that the way the Earth is taken care of it is eradicating humanity.
The Earth will return to... The Earth will be here for another...how many billion years it will return to it.
Also the utopian socialist culture, the way that the climate change was going to happen as a result of human activity.
And it was going to be great. We were going to live in a new world where not only would the lion lie down with a lamb, but there would be an anti-lion that would not eat like...
That would be totally vegan or something. He thought of climate change as something really benign and moderating all this cold weather that he'd been experiencing in France.
Well, unfortunately we know otherwise. How about some questions from our audience if you'll just line up here at the microphone?
Yeah, can you hear me? Yeah, it is on. So I like the point that you mentioned about capitalism and I think I'm a point of that, but obviously I do believe that it's supposed to be constrained and directed.
And obviously I mean capitalism with human nature, it could be a very unrestricted, could be a dead combination.
You know, greed, fame, power, so on and so forth. But I think another point that I wanted to maybe share and maybe ask is...we're talking about small groups, but everything is about politicians.
It's about really leadership. And as we can see today, you know, in order for us to create change, well, we have the power of small groups.
I mean, you have to have power. And let's go to direct this kind of like power of change. And unfortunately you see what happens to capitalism and power.
Who are today in power? Which people are truly going to be in that area? And unfortunately it's not so optimistic in that regard.
I mean, I wish there would be some kind of like international outsider body or philosopher, a lawyer, a psychologist.
And really wise people that sit together, that really think what is the right direction that the company needs to go? I mean, the global things.
But again, if there is no money, over is no leadership that really going to say, okay, let's have that. What's happened?
There's two solutions that give me hope. One is that I do believe a global awakening into this. I mean, this whole helen sense, there is an example of a small group coming together as Asians of change.
And I think those are absolutely necessary. There's also this broadening. We see this across all social and economical education levels in our students.
And realize that the system is not functioning well and it's continually degrading and there's no future in this.
At some point, you know, Tachoscu, Romania, there'll be like an awakening where people will stop clapping for the guy on the balcony.
On the other hand to that, not to get to revolutionary, he is economic self-enlightening it.
So there are billionaires who have a doomsday bunkers in New Zealand and all these other places.
And I hope even if it's nothing other than enlightened self-interest, they'll realize that's not a world worth living in.
Even if I have billions and I have shock collars on all my guards to control them, that's not a world I want to live in.
And so, again, you have to kind of maybe draw from the humanities rather than a mathematical model to have a hope and inspiration that humans will overcome with somehow.
I really hope so. But, you know, at the same time, I mean, we are in totally different age.
The technology is so powerful. Even on an individual basis, I find myself sitting at home and feel addicted, like, you know, these examples, that really captures us so much and I really hope that it's not going to be too late.
I'm optimistic in my nature, but, you know, you can see the power that exists, that really driving us.
Yeah, I mean, if I were a betting man, I would see the choke point, the Fermi paradox, why there are no advanced civilizations because any organically evolved,
organism will self-extinguish because their technologies will outpace their morality or the ability to control their own impulse, space impulse.
But, again, we're humans. I mean, you look at art, you look at the great things humans have done and how we've survived in the nuclear age to this point.
So, you have to kind of be an optimist in the face of, you know, even from the tree of knowledge.
I mean, thank you.
I have a turtle trick question.
I'm Mark Mitt, an ad about kind of a nerdy magician.
So, I have a trick question for all of you. And I really mean this.
So, how many of you on the panel know what the Highlands group or the Highlands Forum is? Just by a show of hands.
Okay, so it's one.
I think you told me about it.
All right.
No, but this way, I brought it, I bring it up, right, in discussions like this, especially even related to your question, it just says your question before, John.
And then the second question, how many of you know what I mean by the letters B-I-S?
My point is, no, it's called the Bank of International Settlements.
Okay, yeah.
So, and my point is, is that we discuss things like communism and capitalism outside.
I mean, the biggest lesson I can teach you for magic is that if one trick has ever fooled anyone, ever, it means that you can be fools.
You can be deceived. And so context is as important as anything we discuss.
So, if you're, so the Highlands group or the Highlands Forum is basically leads, it's a very loose kind of organization formed in the 90s that leads private public partnerships in the areas of the military industrial complex.
The Bank of International Settlements was formed by a treaty in 1930, which organized the payment of the settlements of the Treaty of Versailles, the War Guild Clause, Article 231.
So, so they're both kind of essential.
They've been running the dollar since 1971 with a thing called the Basel Accords.
I'm just saying, these are very basic things.
So, if you're going to talk about communism and capitalism and you don't know what's running the world, then we're in trouble.
And I just think it's just a wake-up call that we all need.
And if things are not going to be run by governments anymore, if they're going to be run by private public partnerships and we don't study those, then our discussions don't have a rudder and we're all in trouble.
By the way, I am a member of the Highlands Forum.
Okay, good.
I think they would be very happy to learn that they're running the world.
No, I don't mean by that, but you know what I mean.
I know what kind of an organization is.
I know the founder.
I've spoken at a number of their meetings.
And I don't know all of the other things that they or members of it do.
But I can say I'm on their listserv and I've contributed items to their reading list.
And so I think that there could be a lot that I don't know.
But all I'm saying is that it's important to have an act.
I don't know the Bank of International Settlements either, so for all I know they could be running the world.
But I'm just saying that the founder of the Highlands Forum who is a friend and who is not well now, I think he would be a friend.
I think he would be distressing to him to have the forum characterized as...
Well, I'm not saying running the world.
What I'm saying is if you're having this discussion and you're not talking about those groups, because as you know, the Highlands Forum is organized in a very interesting way with groups of 25 to 30 people all in different areas.
And Mr. O'Neill did an amazing thing. It's an amazingly insightful thing and it does gear up the military industrial complex for the future.
But I'm just saying if we're going to have these discussions and not understand these basic organizational groups and organizations, then it's very hard to affect change.
It goes back to what should you characterize, hope in the face of knowledge.
And also with your students feeling empowered or not.
So with all of their professors and all the people talking about communism and socialism and journalism and all those things don't know about basic banking structures in the world and how the New York Fed interacts with the Bank of International Settlements and vice versa,
then I'd suggest that's misguided and at least it's not going to be able to affect any kind of change.
And with the Highlands Forum group, what it's just is that if you don't know that like Martin through Lidos organizes the National Institute of Health, the NIH,
then it's kind of important to know how Lockheed Martin, but what is their relationship with Lidos biologicals?
When you flew here today, you probably worked through what through Lidos gate.
So these things are very practical. It's just good to know where we live. What's the context? That's what I'm saying.
And so it'd be great. Maybe we should do an informal session afterwards for 30 minutes on what you think the Highlands Forum is and what Mr. Neil was trying to do.
I think that would affect more change than just discussions where they're not grounded in the actual world that we're in.
Mark is a magician, of course. And I'll just say one thing about this aspect of what is that I think what fascinates Mark here and what I think is sort of a subcurrent of what we've been describing is attention,
the importance of attention in our society, that magicians thrive on misdirection of attention, on selective change blindness and what we're not seeing.
And of course, the attention economy is what drives fear, anger, the things that keep eyeballs on a given, the algorithms are what generate that kind of attention.
So I think whatever we do, if it's going to be through small groups, is probably a good way of beginning to diversify attention on a larger scale.
I just want to say two quick things, that capitalism, corporations, is a legal system that works for if you want to be in business, if you're a small entrepreneur, and you want to go about and you're not incorporated,
you can, a person can come into your building, trip, and sue you for everything you have. You're forced to be in that capitalist corporate system if you want to survive and deal with these situations, which is what I think you were talking about.
The other element I want to say is that mindfulness is extremely important, especially if you do not want to be subjected to the chatter of the left side of your brain.
There's a right side of the brain, it's the creative side. Until that left-brain chatter is understood, you'll never access your childlike mindfulness qualities there from the right side of your brain. That's all I want to say.
I want to put that in a slightly scream-like way, and fear makes people stupid, and sugar on your own. And I think when you're talking about it, it's the best way to communicate people to the scary people that you've ever put them down, and you've requested them to work for self-care.
Or they can, or they can, or they can burn across this, or they can't demonstrate. And I think every teacher has that. If you can shame people, if you scare them, you don't get the sauce.
You have to keep scaring them. Like, no, it's true. Like if you give someone, if you motivate someone by fear into going to do something, if you don't keep scaring them, that'll wear off at a certain point.
It isn't lasting change to sort of motivate through fear, I think.
Right. Well, exactly. By the way, the last question I raised, I'm very interested in going about capitalism, and how technology changes capitalism.
There was an article I read recently about how independent service stations can't afford the instruments that they need to repair the newest high-tech cars.
So everybody's really forced to go to a dealer. And Tesla, of course, Elon Musk is like the prime example of everything we've been talking about.
Tesla does not even allow any kind of repairs by independence. So it's a form of capitalism of concentration and corporatization.
So I understood a lot of what motivated the conversation today was what we're going through these days.
The pandemic, political turmoil, war in Ukraine. And of course, we can't blame all those things on capitalism.
It plays a role with, as you've all elaborated really very well.
But I think we know that the world's gone through phases where it seems that everything's falling apart.
You mentioned 1914, you talked about the Ludlow incident, World War II, the other pandemics.
We know there's this other economic idea of creative destruction that Schumpeter mentioned.
And I thought it was interesting that didn't come up as part of the conversation.
I wonder whether if there is creative destruction, people respond to these periods of chaos and catastrophe,
and then sort of build, would like to think we built a better world from it.
Are these small units, the small units that we were talking about that might play a role in creatively solving some of our problems?
Are they struggling to do so now because of social media and other things?
Are there things that are impeding our ability to be resilient and build a better world?
Yes. I think there are several.
One thing is what we talked about, the escalating costs, you can't get off the right track or you'll be penalized.
And so I think in the generation of Arsenal they're less willing to take a risk.
They're less willing to just get on a plane and go to Europe or Asia and do something off beat or start a company or try to become a musician.
They all want to work for Goldman Sachs.
Go to Wall Street, go to Terrible of the Alarm.
That's one thing. The other thing I would say is that creative destruction requires a certain fluidity.
And so when you have an entrenched monolith, monopolistic power that basically sets up all the space, it makes us all fools errand to.
So I remember at the time Microsoft was dominating the Valley and the talk was like, oh, well, what's your Microsoft strategy?
What are you going to do if Microsoft does this?
And so it's like, it's stifles innovation.
And so when you have an incumbent, and it doesn't have to be another private sector, it could be the government or some civil government agency that has just legal governmental political cover that you can never pierce.
And so regulatory access.
So there are certain things that require that creative destruction to occur.
They are saying with all the layoffs and tech, however, but this may be at a start of a new round of amazing new companies, right?
Because there's so few of these large...
Or it could make people so afraid that they want to join a big company and pay their rent in the college tuition.
But that point reminded me of how in a way the depression was actually a more hopeful time.
And one of the reasons for that creative destruction was that, for example, Edmund Wilson and his friends were able to rent a townhouse in the East 50s for $50 a month.
So New York was actually a very attractive place for young Bohemian at the time.
And that was partly a result of the destruction of real estate values in the Depression.
And there were economists at the University of Maryland who calculated, they looked at the decades of the most important inventions economically.
And they found that the 1930s were the most fruitful time for invention.
There were lots of young people who had ideas for solving the problems that had been created.
And so it was a great time for entrepreneurship.
And the reason we don't recognize it as such is that many of those, for example, Xerox copying really not developed commercially until after the Second World War.
But if you look at their origins, and if you look at the origins of classic designs like the aviator sunglasses that our president wears or the snail dispenser of Scotch taste,
so many of these classics really date from the Depression when a lot of people, especially younger people,
were seizing the opportunity that the destruction caused to plan a new future.
I think that's a great note to end on. It means that there's hope.
I thank you all very much.
Thank you.
Thank you.
