Good afternoon, everyone.
Welcome to the Hill Center's final event for the spring of 2022.
And again, we're sorry to report that we've continued to have to be a Zoom-only presentation,
but this is also available on YouTube in perpetuity.
Today, I have the, well, I'm Gerald Herrowitz.
I'm the Associate Director of Hill Center.
And I'm here with this illustrious panel of discussants who are going to discuss the
rather large topic of metaphysics.
Let me take a moment to introduce our panelists, and then we'll get our conversation underway.
Of course, future HELEX programs will be announced in due time, which will start again, start
up again in the fall of 2022.
And we're hoping that those will include live round tables.
So first, I'll introduce Harold Atman-Spacher, who is a Senior Scientist and Staff Member
at the Collegium Helvetikum University of Zurich and ETH Zurich since 2007.
After his PhD in Physics at Munich University, he worked as a Research Scientist at the Max
Bong Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics at Garching until 1998.
Then he served as head of the theory group at the Institute for Frontier Areas of Psychology
at Freiburg until 2013.
His fields of research are the theory of complex systems, conceptual and theoretical aspects
of algebraic quantum theory, and mind matter relations from interdisciplinary perspectives.
He is the President of the Society for the Mind Matter Research for Mind Matter Research
and Editor-in-Chief of the Interdisciplinary International Journal Mind and Matter.
Moving on, Elizabeth Barnes is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Virginia.
Her research interests are divided between metaphysics, social philosophy, feminist philosophy
and ethics.
She's particularly interested in the places where these topics overlap.
She's written a book on disability called The Minority Body and is currently writing a
book about the nature of health.
Lately, she's also been thinking a lot about the metaphysics of social structures.
Hans Halverson is the Stuart Professor of Philosophy at Princeton University.
He has written extensively on the foundations of quantum physics, philosophy of science
and the relationship between science and theology, with articles appearing in the Journal of
Mathematical Physics, Physical Review and the British Journal of Four Philosophy of Science,
among others.
Jefferson has received a Mellon Foundation New Directions Fellowship, a Cushing Memorial
Prize in the History and Philosophy of Physics, best article a year by a research PhD, and
10 best philosophy articles of the year, both in 2001 and 2002.
Greg Yeager is a Professor of Natural Science and Mathematics at Boston University.
Her postdoc will work in the history of science and experimental quantum optics physics, sorry,
quantum optical physics.
He assumed his current interdisciplinary professorship in 2006.
He was awarded a Cavill, a Cauvley Fellowship in 2008, for his work on quantum computing,
holding two fundamental patents, and co-edited Philosophy of Quantum Information and an Add
in Tanglement on Cambridge University Press.
He is the author of the monograph's quantum information, entanglement information and
interpretation of quantum mechanics, and quantum objects.
Most recently, he co-authored quantum metrology, imaging, and communication, and co-edited
quantum arrangements.
His current work focuses on the ontological status of elementary particles in quantum
field theory.
Finally, Arkady Blatnitsky is a distinguished Professor of Literature, theory, and cultural
studies program, and philosophy and literature program at Purdue University.
He has published nine books, several edited or co-edited collections, and about 200 articles
on continental philosophy, romantic and monodist literature, the Philosophy of Mathematics and
Physics, and the relationship among literature, philosophy, and science.
His most recent book is Reality Without Realism, Matter, Thought, and Technology in Quantum
Physics.
His next book, Logos and Alagon, The Thinkable and The Unthinkable in Mathematics on the Pythagoreans
of the Moderns, is forthcoming from Springer Nature next year.
So with that, I'd like to get things rolling.
I thought we might start by having each of our discussions make a brief comment about,
let's say, what they think metaphysics is and what it's for.
I think it would be nice if it would be brief and then we can get the conversation rolling.
So whoever wants to volunteer, they go first.
Let's go for it.
Do I have to pick someone?
On to it, take a shot.
You look like you're making a move.
Okay.
Well, I'll say a couple words about my own professional background because I've had the
good fortune that although my primary field of study was philosophy as an undergraduate
student and then I became interested in, I mean, it became very clear to me that philosophical
research, I think, benefits a lot from looking at what's going on in science, hopefully to
learn for itself, but also actually I hope the contribution can go the other way.
One of the main reasons for me that was important is I was educated in the United States my
entire life.
I got in many ways what I thought was a good scientific education, but I thought it was
a scientific education that said, stop at a certain point asking certain questions, right?
Because we need to focus our time on calculations and new technologies and we don't want to
get hung up in these big questions about like, why do we exist?
Why is there a universe?
Things like this.
So that's what naturally led me into philosophy.
But then I was fortunate that I was around philosophers that said, hey, these are really
the same conversation.
So although I would not actually consider myself a metaphysician because within philosophy
there are some who have very special professional competence in metaphysics, but I actually think
that anyone who's reflecting on the nature of reality is to some extent doing metaphysics.
And I think even scientists who may feel like it's important for them professionally to
say what I'm doing is physics.
It's not metaphysics.
I think that's actually unfortunately not really true.
I mean, I think they are doing metaphysics even if they're not being completely honest
about that.
So I'm glad that we're able to talk about this openly here and that we have people with
sort of both, you know, angles on this, both coming from the sciences and from philosophy.
Great.
If I could follow up on what Han says, because I have a somewhat different background.
I'm not as nearly steeped in the sciences, but I agree with a lot of what he said in terms
of what metaphysics is.
I mean, if I, I think it's kind of a foolhardy project to try to give definitions of any
aspect of philosophy because it's so slippery, but I guess in a nutshell, I would think of
metaphysics as something like questions about the nature of reality that aren't better or
at least completely addressed by empirical means.
And of course, it's a somewhat often fraught and tendentious question exactly what those
questions might be or the extent of what empirical inquiry inquiry can show us or what linguistic
inquiry can show us or that kind of thing.
But in terms of what metaphysics is for, my own background is that I came to metaphysics
from a place of skepticism.
I didn't like it.
And I didn't want to do it.
And I wanted to do ethics and sort of the more humanistic end of philosophical inquiry
without doing metaphysics.
And I found that I couldn't avoid it.
I mean, my philosophical trajectory has kind of been like me yelling at metaphysics.
I wish I knew how to quit you.
And I haven't been able to.
It seemed to me that one of the key aspects of metaphysics as a part of philosophical
inquiry is just that these questions always come up, it always comes up.
What is the difference between correlation and causation?
If we have these observed regularities, what do they explain?
What do they say?
What are these things?
What parts of this thing that we're saying is just an aspect of theory into what extent
does it represent reality?
And they're like all of these things inevitably involve metaphysical questions.
And so I would say, for me personally, the primary role of metaphysics is most of these
inelimitable questions that are not primarily empirical questions, but they are questions
about what the world is like.
There seems to be this, oh, Greg, I think you're muted.
You want to go ahead?
Sorry.
Yeah.
Yes, I was going to say, I mean, I think that this discussion has gone very nicely in the
sense of people painting their own sense of what metaphysics is and why it's important
for me.
I'm also someone who has studied different aspects of learning and have inquired about
the nature of reality my entire life, which is why I've studied mathematics, physics,
and philosophy my whole life and tried to do them regularly.
And the thing which really drives me to metaphysical questions is the whole issue of precisely
what is the relationship between our theory and reality.
And it doesn't really matter what science you're in a Carnapian sense.
It doesn't really matter which science you're talking about, which part of the humanities
you're talking about, you're trying to understand the world in a certain sense.
So I'm a physicist primarily or interested in philosophy of physics.
And so when I approach these things, I always imagine the standard sort of thing of physicists
would think, which is, well, reality, you know, it's definitely physical in some way.
And the default position metaphysically for most physicists is realism.
So if there's an objective reality out there exactly how does the various sciences and
methods of thinking connect with each other.
And in the sciences, you know, you have this natural tower of the sciences with presumably
physics at the bottom and then chemistry and then biology and then perhaps mind at a higher
level.
And there's an attempt to reduce these things down to the lowest level.
So that's why I'm primarily focusing now on the ontological status of elementary particles
because the default position in physics has been for a long time that if you understand
the things at the lowest level, then you can understand these other things.
So it's a sort of natural drive to metaphysics, the physics and science in general, natural
sciences brings, I think.
I know I was about to jump in and say, I know there's this history that I think we
seem to be past.
And I'd recommend that it's a title for this roundtable originally is metaphysics dead
because there had been this long, you know, reign of logical positivism and the analytic
philosophers who had sort of claimed that metaphysics should be eliminated as best it
can.
And so the job of philosophy is just to clean that up and make metaphysics as minimal as
possible.
And now there's been a little bit of resurgence and I think it's really interesting to see
why that is.
And we're we're headed with that.
So, Arkady, do you want to make a comment about your thoughts?
Yeah, I'm kind of new to the word metaphysics, although not to the subject because, you know,
my I have a double trajectory in my intellectual life.
My and was originally trained in quantum field theory and mathematics.
And my first graduate degree wasn't that specifically group representations and things like that.
And then I got interested in certain trends and continental philosophy.
And in both of these, the metaphysics was, I wouldn't say dirty word, but just about
and the and the reason for that part of the reason for that I think is that in some of
these previous comments, it seems to me that there is a kind of sense of metaphysics.
Well, the term has many various meanings.
For example, the question, what is reality and what is representation of reality and
the difference of that type could be seen as metaphysicals or may not be seen as metaphysical
depending how you define metaphysics.
I think in both of the trends to which I came into both of the subjects of my interest,
these questions were of course all these asked.
But the reason that there was skepticism about metaphysics, especially in subtle continental
philosophy apart from one philosopher whom I know, Algio Delus, who used the word was
not so much these questions, which were always asked, but the way we ask these questions,
I think that's the one thing which I wanted to say that the question is how we ask these
questions rather than simply these questions as such.
And anyway, as I mentioned to Greg earlier, my thesis for today is there is no metaphysics,
there is only metaphysics.
So that's a double statement which I think is true depending on how you define metaphysics.
Thank you.
So the king is dead long with the king.
Anyway, Harold, you want to make a comment?
Oh, you're viewed in Harold.
Yeah.
Am I unmuted now?
Yes.
Okay, good.
So I want to connect up with what Hans actually said at the beginning and start with what
I was studying and what the problems were that our teachers actually confronted us within
our studies.
And interestingly, I think Hans is completely right.
Whenever questions came up to the meaning of this or that, and then typically the response
was this has become a winged word shut up and calculate.
And then I entered into a phase in my studies when I went Hans Primoz at the ETH in Zurich.
He was actually a professor of theoretical chemistry, but he was much more than that.
He was actually a mathematical physicist with strong philosophical inclinations.
And he would always say, you know, when scientists claim that they have no metaphysical position
that they usually have a poor one because they are just unconscious of it.
And of course, every scientist, he would say, must have a metaphysical position.
Otherwise, he wouldn't be able to do science, even the practicing physicist in his lab goes
with the assumption that there is something there that he does experiments with, even
though specifically in quantum physics, we know that our empirical access to the system
out there changes that system or the state of that system.
So we never see the reality out there.
Just by trying to access it, we change it.
This is pretty clear now in quantum mechanics, but it's also pretty clear in cognitive science.
What we see out there is not what is out there.
There are very interesting experiments about that.
So in my trajectory, it became more and more obvious that the metaphysics has the study
of what is there other than what we see there or what we can empirically do experiments
with.
This is an important question.
So that's why I got into that.
Well, there's this issue of the fact of metaphysics being the foundation of a lot of physical science.
And this other interesting fact that some scientists seem to want to deny it.
I wonder if there are so many wonderful historical examples of scientists informed by their
metaphysics.
And rightly and wrongly, I think some of the examples that are often put forward as being
a wrong example of metaphysical influence and science would be, let's say, alchemy.
I mean, many other examples.
Of course, Newton was completely absurd without me and yet produced all this wonderful science.
And there are other examples where scientists obviously did have some form of a metaphysical
position and it really did help them very much in their scientific research.
So I wonder if there are any thoughts you might share about that.
Well, I could say that one of the examples that usually comes up when people think about
the relationship between physics and philosophy is Heisenberg.
And Heisenberg was, of course, the person who's most closely associated with this idea that
looking upon something can influence it and restrict potentially your ability to see it
in itself.
And he certainly did bring in philosophical ideas in order to try to move forward.
One of the most important things, which I've been interested in is his investigation of
quantum potentiality.
That when you start talking about the mathematics of quantum physics, what you're really talking
about is mathematical description of the thing in itself, but you can never really access
that thing.
But when you go and measure it, you do see something real and there's a certain mathematical
relationship between those two things that the external reality has a potential, but it's
only actual when you see it and it takes a form which we can understand when you actually
do make that observation.
So I think that's a case of not a bad, but actually a good example of somebody bringing
philosophy in the physics and he was a very thoughtful person, obviously.
I think this is a great point and great because in the beginning, in the pioneer phase that
we say of quantum mechanics, there was an interpretation of quantum mechanics that was
called the Copenhagen interpretation.
And the Copenhagen and Heisenberg was part of it and part of the founders and the Copenhagen
interpretation tried to stay away as much as possible from saying something about the
metaphysical or what you call the potential now.
Heisenberg moved forward from that in his later years when he came up with the ideas
that you just mentioned.
But of course, the Copenhagen interpretation is a knowledge-based interpretation whereas
many people in reaction to that, quantum mechanics, tried to find an ontological basis for it.
And this was the starting point of ongoing discussions about which one is the right interpretation
to be the epistemic, the knowledge-based interpretation or the ontological interpretation.
Now, the modern point of view now is that it's not really quite right to play these interpretations
out against one another.
The really interesting question is how they hang together, how one plays into the other
and maybe even find some rules, how something that is out there due to an experiment or
due to an observation comes into our mind-dependent representation.
I have a little bit of difficulties with some of these terms because first of all, there
is no such a thing as a single Copenhagen interpretation.
It's never been.
That's of course, Jia.
Because for example, even from the very beginning, Bohr and Heisenberg's interpretation were
somewhat different.
It is also true, however, as Karl pointed out, that Heisenberg changed somewhat his views
of things.
In fact, if you look into his earlier book in 1930 on the physical principles of quantum
theory, there is a very interesting comment.
We shared with him that one of the reasons that we cannot see, there was always a kind
of ontology in the Copenhagen interpretation that has to do with what we see in measuring
instruments.
That was assumed to be real and in fact, representable by means of classical physics.
The question is that classical physics could not explain how what we see comes about and
could not predict it.
So Heisenberg made a point in which he said, look, it's not so surprising because our
brain evolutionary developed in dealing with the object consisting of billions of atoms,
et cetera.
So there is no special reason to assume that it can deal with how nature is constituted
at the ultimate level.
So his position in that way was saying that was much closer to Bohr, which Bohr sort
of always maintain and for Bohr was always central, the classical description of measuring
instruments later on in the book where he talks on potentiality, especially physics and philosophy
to which I presume Greg in part refers.
He takes a very interesting position following in part, responding to Kant.
Big part of this book is his response to Kant, idea that we cannot really know things on
themselves.
I cannot go into detail, but he said it may be that for a physicist, if things on themselves
exist, they would at all, they would be mathematical.
It was influenced by quantum field theory and group representation and all these things
and Dirac's ideas.
So I think so from that point of view, first of all, so he has a somewhat different view,
but the second point which I want to make that in a way, the things I agree with the
point that the things that are epistemological and ontological are kind of mixed, we also
need to define these terms because ontology can have two meanings.
One is assumption that there is something outside us which is real.
And another one is the assumption that we could describe or represent or at least conceive
of what it is outside.
So I think these are two different meanings of ontology.
And I think from within most people in Copenhagen interpretation, certainly born in Reisenberg,
there was an assumption of the outside material reality.
The question is, to what degree you could represent the ultimate constitution as opposed
to the effects which it has on what you actually observe.
And I think in parallel development, actually the psych analysis and Freud's theory, et cetera,
use the idea of unconsciousness, the unconscious, which had some of connections of this line
that we see the effects of the unconscious, but not necessarily the unconscious itself.
I think there's a lot of very nuanced structures to this, to this, to this, to this, to this
term.
I think it's a little bit so difficult to, so that's what I would want to add as a footnote
to this comments.
I wanted to, because that's a lot of really interesting commentary.
I wanted to make my own brief interjection and bring it down the ground a little bit.
I always think of the quantum revolution as being a case where perhaps, and you can correct
me if I'm wrong for the first time, this sort of physical theory outstripped any sense of
where it's connected to reality.
It reminds you a little bit of those cartoons where the character runs out over it off the
end of the cliff and is out in the air and doesn't know where it is.
How exactly to interpret the Schrodinger equation, whether or not it referred to some physical
thing or not, seemed to be to be a unique problem that physics found itself in.
And maybe that is something to do with the return of metaphysical thinking among some
of the later generations.
I would say that's a fairly unique situation where the science insisted on a metaphysical
interpretation, whether you like it or not, so to speak.
My comment on that would be that I believe that there's some historical momentum because
of the success of classical physics that presented this default that things would naturally
work out very well if we just thought about the world as made up of core puzzles moving
around according to specific sorts of differential equations that we could make all the predictions
we wanted.
Of course, that wasn't actually the case, but that was the sense.
And I think that that's why this feeling of going off a cliff was so severe in the case
of quantum mechanics.
I think in the stretch of history, maybe it wasn't so unique, but certainly it's the
closest and very dramatic.
So I would agree with you in that sense.
I'm wondering if it might be okay to come back to something that Greg mentioned earlier
that I think I'm just quite curious.
I think we probably have a very different range of opinions about this was that Greg
mentioned the sort of traditional picture of the layers with physics at the bottom and
chemistry and so on and so forth.
And I certainly, I mean, I've done some physics myself and I understand that sort of intuition.
I would say though, I think more recently I've started to think, I'm not sure I understand
why we would think that way as a sort of descriptive layering just in the sense that it may be
motivating in a certain sense to physicists and they think, you know, we're getting down
to the deeper, deeper, deeper part of reality.
But I mean, I would say my sense is that we're not making more progress in sort of seeing
the, I mean, this relates to the quantum thing.
It's not like we're seeing more progress now explaining the common sense world from the
physics.
It's actually kind of like the physics is getting so weird that we're getting further
away from sort of, you know, making sense of the world around me.
I mean, it's not like now I can look around me and go, well, now it makes sense because
I understand the Schrodinger equation.
It's sort of the opposite.
Like the Newtonian picture was almost like, oh, I can just replace, I can replace the
manifest image around me with the Newtonian picture and it's like, okay, that's better.
It's like, it's hard for me to think I can replace the manifest image of the world around
me with the quantum mechanical picture.
It starts to me to feel like, okay, that's a great, you know, it's a great story or like
sort of great painting of what's going down at the very bottom.
It's a very useful painting.
It certainly does a good job of describing experiments, but I'm not sure it's helping
to make sense of the world around me better.
I'm just curious what the different attitudes were that because I think that it almost
divides people I found sort of in terms of philosophical intuitions.
And there are those who just think, yeah, everything at the bottom is just the physical
stuff and everything else kind of you pull it out of it.
And there are those who resist that.
Let me just just say that that is, I mentioned this is the default position, certainly not
my own position, by any means.
And in fact, I agree with you wholeheartedly, except that I would say give a little bit
of, you know, support to that idea and not insane basis for that, which is that, you
know, the nature of science has been to spread our, the scope of our knowledge and the scope
of our knowledge has been where we've understood fairly well, we can go to the moon with pretty
lousy, I would say physics in the sense of not very sophisticated and a computer, which
is no like the cell phone that I have here.
And that can get you to the moon.
So that's pretty impressive, right?
And so we develop all this technology for us to see different scales.
And when we get to the atomic scale, then we have this interesting thing where, well,
okay, it looks a little bit difficult to understand in our ordinary way of understanding what's
going on there.
But at the same time, if you look at the alcohol process, for example, building up the nature
of the, you know, the periodic table, just from your basic mathematics of it's not so
different from the classical version that you can actually see a structure build up and
you can think of chemical things as built up of those pieces.
And then you can get biochemistry and then you can explain biology and then you can
explain the brain.
Now, I would say like Descartes, well, mind is a different story perhaps.
But you know, there is some basis for thinking that in successive sciences, what I want to
say, but I agree with you, otherwise.
Well, you know, the Anderson, of course, in 1973 famous article, more is different, was
anti-reductionist.
It's a very important article.
I agree entirely that it's, I don't think we could even reduce chemistry to physics,
strictly speaking.
There is a lot of chemistry as Greg just noted, which could be explained by means of chemistry,
but it's very hard to reduce it to physics, except very simple case.
It has a basic explanation of, with Bohr's atomic theory of the table in terms of electron
levels, et cetera.
But it doesn't mean that it can do much of chemistry.
On the other hand, I do think that that's the point which Heisenberg and Park made, that
we should not expect that quantum theory should help us to understand the world around us.
I think Hermann Weil at some point said about mathematics, actually, and he said to relate
the intuition of continuity in mathematics, he was referring to Kantor's theory to our
everyday intuition is meaningless.
But he said we can use this very abstract mathematics in physics, including in relativity
and quantum physics.
And the way you can say that the whole history of mathematics, beginning with roughly the
end of the 19th century, was a developing of abstract mathematics, which had very little
connections to the description of the world.
And remarkably enough, if you think about that, quantum theory Heisenberg, of course,
he didn't use the language, but he essentially used Hilbert spaces over complex numbers.
It's not an object which in any way is related to our intuitive or other descriptions of the
world.
And that's why I think that point about the connections between quantum physics or its
story, et cetera.
And the relationships between the world as we see it is really complex and maybe impossible.
It may be impossible.
I think behind Professor Halberts, when I see painting, which is kind of abstract, and
made me think about Kandinsky and other painters who were contemporary of quantum theory, who
created all these images, which you cannot really connect to the world.
Unlike somebody like Picasso, who always scrambled reality.
Somebody like Kandinsky just came up to totally different, of course, he related it to some
spiritual reality and commenting on this book on spiritual and art.
But I think the point is that I think it would be hard to expect that a quantum theory has
much connections to the actual world.
In fact, to think so in terms of even classical theory is already complicated.
A classical physics is not necessarily, it was born as a mathematical refinement of our
intuition.
This is true.
But by 19th century, it's already developed if you think about Maxwell electrodynamics
and things of that type, very far from what we do.
And I don't think it can explain this different emergent level of how we do so.
We need different explanation.
And in a way, you can say different metaphysics, which operates at different levels of explanation.
I think it might be useful here to make a distinction between different senses of explanation.
So there might be the question of, like, does physics explain ordinary everyday reality
as we encounter it in the sense of, like, if we studied a lot of physics, would we be able
to understand how to make dinner or things like that?
So that sense of, like, would it give us epistemic insight?
And then there's a more metaphysically loaded sense of explanation, which is, like, you
know, if we understood the nature of the fundamental physical particles or something like that,
would that then give us the metaphysical grounding or would it, like, would it explain the nature
of everything?
Would you kind of get everything else for free?
You know, if you were God and you were creating the world, would you basically just have to
create the fundamental particles and the laws and say, you know, let it be thus?
And then you would get the manifest image.
So I guess the difference between, like, is there epistemic emergence?
Or there's some facts that you just couldn't know by knowing the fundamental physical facts?
And then maybe is there ontological emergence?
Is there some stuff that isn't just some basic recombination of the fundamental physical
particles?
Or, like, you could understand everything there was to understand about the nature of
that reality by understanding fundamental reality?
And certainly, like, one of the things I've been interested in thinking about the metaphysics
of the social world, social ontology, is, you know, might there be some interesting ontological
and metaphysical claims about that the nature of the world as we have made it, where we just
need different explanatory tools, we need different concepts, we need different ways
of talking about what the world is like precisely because we're talking about reality.
That is in part social.
It's part of the way that we have made reality to be that you don't necessarily just get
for free by thinking about the nature of fundamental particles.
But, you know, that's a very, very, very complicated metaphysical question that wouldn't necessarily
be settled either way by settling whether, you know, if you did enough physics, you would
be able to understand what flamingos look like or something like that.
Well, Elizabeth, you mentioned earlier this interesting issue of correlation and causation,
which often arises in these large ensembles, like large groups of elements.
And then the question becomes, how do you decide whether some sort of correlation is
causative or that's just hanging together in some other sense?
And typically when that arises, it also pulls into question whether everything just comes
down to billiard balls, right?
Because now you've got the action of all these ensembles.
I think it's a really interesting handle on this problem.
Well, I'm going to go ahead and come back.
Oh, sorry, Craig.
So I would just say quickly, you know, the real question that comes to mind there, if
you're a true believer in this kind of physicalist view is, you know, kind of mathematics do
it and the answer is no, the mathematics can't do it.
The mathematics will probably never do it, absolutely.
But on the other hand, you know, we didn't really understand why the sky was blue until
we did enough quantum field theory, which is not very well-informed fact.
But as a matter of fact, this particular sort of scattering is something that is understood
best and probably only correctly after quantum field theory.
So it's a very complex question, but I would agree with you on the basic level of it.
It's a fantasy to think that you're just understanding some elementary particles you're
going to understand the mind or social reality or anything terribly complicated.
My strong sense is, again, I speak as someone who's, I hang around a lot of philosophers
and even meta positions, although I don't think I would call myself meta position.
My sense is that, you know, so somebody, you know, physics, when one is doing physics,
the job description is fairly clear.
It's, I mean, it's fairly institutionally fixed, what a physicist does.
I think my sense is for metaphysicians, their self description of their task is probably
quite different from meta position to meta position.
And my sense is that the way Elizabeth described her way of thinking is very different from
some other meta positions who sort of think, my job is to look at all the sciences and
just tell you how everything kind of flows out from the bottom to the top.
Yeah, I think sociologically, that's definitely right.
And I mean, one thing I've like personally been interested in criticizing the idea of
like the goal of metaphysics is to describe the nature of fundamentality or something
like that.
So there's this idea that, you know, we figure out what's fundamental, what the basic reality
is that sort of, you get a lot, there's a lot of interesting word choice and so you get
the language of like purity.
So the pure reality or the, you know, the ungrounded or the all this kind of stuff.
And so it's like, if we could just describe that, then the task of metaphysics is sort
of carving the beast of nature at its joints or is talking about the absolutely fundamental.
And then everything else is maybe just kind of derivative on that or grounded in that or
explained by that or an ontological free lunch or something like that is the phrasing that
you sometimes use.
And I think that's a very common way of thinking about the projects of metaphysics within at
least analytic philosophy.
But I think it's also a way of thinking about project of metaphysics, which a lot of people
have been critical and that there's a lot of really interesting metaphysics that's not
doing anything like that.
So two of my colleagues at the University of Virginia who both self describe as metaphysicians
have just published books.
And one of them is about the nature of personhood and personhood over time, like what makes
you the same person that you were 10 years ago, 15 years ago, can we give any sort of
account of that.
And the other is about dependence and explanation and basically trying to criticize the idea
to criticize the assumption of foundationalism, that explanation always has to come to an end.
So could there be infinite change of dissent?
Could there be circular chains of explanations?
Did there, you know, so there's big discussions of explanation and non-well founded set theory
or things like that.
And they both think of themselves as doing metaphysics, absolutely.
But they're not trying to carve the beast of nature at its joints.
They're not trying to explain the nature of fundamentality, but nor are they doing something
that they think of as just conceptual engineering.
We're talking about, you know, what's reality like?
I think the real question is, you know, you just brought that up, carving nature at its
joints, right?
Because nature has, you know, joints, primarily, or is it our descriptions that produce joints
that we try out to describe nature and decompose it into elements that are connected by these
joints.
So I think a very interesting proposal, which goes along the lines of what you were saying,
Elizabeth, is already due to Kwein in 1960, something where he tried to relativize ontology.
So actually, the article that he wrote has a title, Ontological Relativity.
And the idea is, and of course, Kwein says that in much more detail than I can, reproduce
it now, the idea is something like every domain of description that we choose for a certain
situation to describe it can be considered ontologically or not.
And then we can have many ontologies, which are connected to one another and actually
Kwein charges us that we should find translations between these ontologies.
And this is actually his program of ontological relativity.
And once you, but once you look at a certain situation and find the best way to describe
it, then you should commit yourself to that ontology and not change it during the description
all the time.
Hillary Putnam actually had the same or worked this out with his idea of internal realism,
which is a little bit different in the nuances, but essentially the same idea.
And that's the way to find a middle path between foundationalism, which Kwein rejected Putnam
II, and the other extreme of something like radical emergence where everything is possible
and nothing is connected with one another.
So complete arbitrariness of descriptions.
I think this is a proposal which is still somewhat understudied in the sciences, although
it has received some serious consideration philosophy, of course.
Well, of course, if you look at the word meta to start with, like restotials books on metaphysics,
which was not his title, was added by somebody, some say, it means, it just means that the
books come after metaphysics, next set of books.
I think the word meta implies in a way that you describe one system in terms of an other,
which is can comprehend the system from outside to some degree.
So I think so from that point of view, you can have a very different level of metaphysics
depending what you define as physics.
One of the main big contributions and my view in quantum mechanics, especially in the
Bohr's interpretation of an early Heisenberg, I'm not sure about Copenhagen, is that we
and I think you extend it can be for at least in physics.
We always deal with our interaction with the world.
To some degree, clients different level of ontology describe different levels of this
interaction.
In that sense, if you take an extreme position, which I actually like and we're not completely
taking it, that everything is metaphysics in terms of it.
We can only have a human description of anything.
Part of Heisenberg's point was, with which I started here, that there is no reason to
believe that we could describe the ultimate level of reality or maybe some other level
of reality.
We hear that we were fortunate that mathematics is to some degree free of limitations of common
language and concepts and it can predict what happens in quantum mechanics.
But we don't necessarily can hope that it could work in any other set of areas.
I think it's true that the metaphysicians, in part for that reason, define this task very
differently from most physicists beginning with Galileo and after who could think in
terms of mathematical description of predictions of what is going on.
Because technically, that's why the origin of the so-called the heart problem of consciousness.
We really don't have a physicalist, functional interpretation of our conscious experience
in terms of coalesce.
I think that really tells you that it may not be possible to describe many things to
which we relate to the worth of our mind in mathematical terms.
So I think that seems to me that that is the, it's very hard to believe that that program
of from bottom, on the other hand, I'm not quite sure who would subscribe to that extreme
view that everything it really doesn't matter.
There's all these connections and there's always some sense of systematicity in description
and the interaction between various levels.
Since you're talking about the meaning of meta, Arkady, do you know what Karlab said
about that?
Yes, I do, yes.
Whatever you do, I can do meta.
Exactly true, because there is all this system which, you know, Lakota Shka's has
an interesting comment on that as well, you know, but the Lakota Shka's, you know, it's
a great statement of Lakota Shka's that all physical theory have the same probability
to be true, namely zero, right?
So in a certain sense, it's always our engagement with the world in different domain through
mathematics and technology and physics, which produces because while the ultimate likelihood
the theory is to be true even though Einstein believed that thermodynamics will probably
always be true is the local possibility of how it works.
So in that sense, it is a kind of workable theory which is at this giving moment is we
accept, but it doesn't necessarily mean that it continue to be and therefore from that
point of view, and I say there's only metaphysics, I mean by that, that we don't have any description
except the ones which produce by who we are as evolutionary developed by biological beings
with the brains which produces the mind which we don't know how it does either.
And only briefly my second comment to what you said about the heart problem of consciousness
is it's only a brief comment, I'm just coming back from the consciousness conference, the
big consciousness conference in Tucson which takes place in Tucson every other year and
you would be astonished how many neuroscience people still believe there's only the brain
that we have to talk about, right?
No, I'm not astonished, I know that's called.
Yeah, of course I know that.
That's true.
Yeah, I was going to say, look, I think I need to defend those who take a slightly more
hardcore view about, you know, we just want to describe, you know, reality like it is
not.
I completely agree with the phrasing for example that, you know, every description is a human
description but the thing is, I think that's also can be interpreted in a negative way
where somebody says, okay, so then there's no more standards, right?
I mean, like my description is my description, your description is your description.
So you know, I think that taken in the wrong way, it can just, it can sort of destroy the
grand scientific project or even the minor individual seeking truth projects we have
as individuals, right?
Where you somehow always have to tell yourself, my view, the view that's influenced by who
I am is probably in many ways very wrong because of who I am, because of my perspective, because
of various things inside me.
So what's, you know, I think I feel that I think that longing that some people have
and they say that but there's just that description of the way things are is because they're trying
to say, remember, not every description is equally good.
So I think that's one thing we're missing here is we, you know, what is that standard
we're trying to live up to?
That's very true.
But I don't think you need to have one need to take this position is also some do that
meaning that every, as you say, you agree that every is a human interaction doesn't imply
because within each giving the main there reasons, you can, you can still do quantum
mechanics under the assumption of all the constraints which are involved without necessarily assuming
that you strictly describe the ultimate nature of reality.
I don't think anyone like I said, in fact, bore, you know, as a great statement says
about complementarity, he says the complementarity actually contrary to Einstein fulfilled all
the basic principle requirement as science as a mathematical experimental engagement
with nature.
Science, including institutionally has this type of rules and constraints which tells
us something about that is to say we may not know things about reality but our interaction
with reality is not free.
You know, it's not strictly free.
It's not it's a matter of how it plays itself out.
So I cannot, you know, come out and say without any constraint.
Look, as I think that there is some universal consciousness somewhere, et cetera.
It's not a scientific statement.
So from that point of view, we are governed by this rule, some of which could be personal.
The question is what you believe as a ground and wish you stand and for many people as
you say to believe that you describe reality, give you such a ground, but such a ground
is not necessary.
If you think about people like nature and to some degree, they believe in each famous
because they say long live physics because it gives us the sense of integrity, right?
But at the same time, he believes in certain in the radical perspectives.
I think it's a I think your comment is extremely good because it is a very complex landscape
of negotiating between how you ground what you say about your interaction with the world.
So that seems to me is a crucial point.
You can't grow them in reality, but you don't in the ultimate constitution of reality, but
you don't necessarily need to in my view.
But just to follow up on what Hans, the point that Hans was making, no, I do think there
is like, there's something about and you don't have to go as far as like scientific realism,
but something about like the metaphysical assumption that there is an external reality
that we are attempting to describe, that we are attempting to, you know, to describe
with scientific theories.
That's maybe different.
And that's a different type of project than we might be doing in other types of humanistic
inquiry that does seem to be an important constraint on the practice in some cases, or
at least like a hopeful aspect of the practice.
And of course, you can distinguish between thinking that it's what we're trying to do
and thinking it's what creatures like us are able to do.
Like, you know, in my everyday life, I'm trying to treat everyone equally and everyone fairly
in order to try to be a moral person.
I also kind of don't believe that someone like me is actually capable of doing that.
You know, I think inevitably I am going to be influenced by bias and influenced by nepotism
and influenced by being grumpy and like all these sorts of things.
And yet, nevertheless, it's what I'm trying to do.
And it's also what I think that someone like me is never going to be in a position to do.
So we might think that like our theories are trying to describe a structure of reality
and yet are never in a position to actually do that because they're done by limited fallible
creatures and because it's really hard to distinguish between what's the element of the theory
and what's the element of, you know, the thing being represented and so on and so forth.
And it does seem like sometimes we want to be able to criticize practices for having
gone wrong.
Whereas if we thought like all you need to do is have like ideological presuppositions
and a coherent way of viewing the world and then get your theories to work out right,
there might be places where it's hard to provide a critique that we want to be able to provide.
So this isn't physics, obviously, but you know, there are these famous cases in psychological
research where studies of whether ESP is real.
And what seems to be the pattern in the research on this is that like people who believe in
ESP design all these really great, well-organized studies and they go and they find ESP and
they find evidence that ESP is real.
And then people who don't believe that ESP is real are like that can't be right.
And they go and they describe design all these really well-organized, you know, great well-designed
studies and they prove that ESP is not real.
And so you've got this practice going on where you've got two set, you know, you've got different
communities that have different assumptions and, you know, different ideological stuff
affecting what they think the world is like and then they're doing scientific practice.
But it seems like what we want to say in this case is, look, either ESP is real or it's
not.
And something's going wrong when science is like this.
You need to be able to figure out what's going wrong here.
But if you don't have that assumption that like either ESP is real or it isn't and the
goal of scientific practice is somewhat imperfectly to figure out what the world is like, then
you can't kind of make that external critique in a way that seems important in an epistemic
situation like that.
Well, it depends on the sense that, you know, it interacts with what I said, it depends on
the level on which you assume ontological reality.
I don't have to make an assumption in physics in principle.
You know, I make an assumption and most physicists do it's very hard to do without it, all the
possible.
There are four layers of Berkeley and fundamental physics that there is exist an external reality
in the sense that the world existed before we came on the stage and will continue to
exist after we are gone from the stage is going to be very soon by the standards of the scale
of the universe.
But that does not mean that I can make any unambiguous or meaningful statement about
how the world really is ultimately.
But I can make an ambiguous and correct statements about the interaction with the world through
technology and mathematics through which I can predict what's going to happen.
And in the case of extracellular perception, you can pause it in a similar way.
You can check to what degree these things correspond to the experiments of which we
conduct.
It doesn't really undermine that on the other hand, even in physics, there is still
always disagreement between people who take ontological position and who don't take ontological
position or there is still different theory.
You know, there are people who are strong believers in so-called bombing and mechanics
and you cannot really, they will not be convinced on kind of similar ground.
It's always to some degree ideological.
But my point is that you could conduct science without making an assumption that the ultimate
nature of reality could be represented by a series.
But there are all these will be levels which will need to be so represented as, for example,
in physics, we need to describe measuring instrument because otherwise we cannot really
do it.
So I think it's not, there are different level.
It's really the level of, as Harold pointed out, Wack-Wine, it's at the level of ontology
and reality which you have to assume.
And if you deal with kind of social metaphysics as you pointed out, it will be different from
doing the metaphysics and physics.
That would be my position on that.
That you don't have to assume that something is real, they assume that something is real,
but you don't have to assume that you could describe even in principle what is real.
You don't have to make this assumption.
But after all, we have no idea what elementary particles are in terms of the physics.
We can only observe the effects on measuring instrument.
Nobody has ever seen an actual elementary particle on its own accord.
You can only see the photographs which they live by collisions with instrument and things
of that.
There's, yeah, please.
I was going to say, Arkady, what would you say then though is that, I mean, if one thought,
okay, I think there's a reality, but it can't be described, what should the goal then be?
So what should the scientist be trying to do?
Well, as I just said, you describe and predict what's going to happen in experiment which
you observe, right?
Or describe reality at the level where you can describe them.
I mean, it was really crucial nuance that you cannot describe the ultimate nature of reality,
but it does not mean, as Carl said, that you can or they must describe.
So you have plenty of goals.
Look, my goal is to develop, listen, I think Paul Girock was quite interesting about that
because he was very mathematical.
So he wasn't even thinking, one of the people who didn't probably have metaphysics, although
I would write the wrong about that.
But the goal was to write an equation which predict was going to happen if a relativistic
electron hits the screen, right?
So he writes the equation which leads to the discovery of a positron.
But what is a positron?
It's another assumption of something which if you hit the screen in a particular way,
you have this and that type of data.
That's a pretty good task to perform.
It's a good task, but I'd say I want to come back to sort of for me at the very beginning
of this, I'm a little bit afraid that that sort of idea is what led to a lot of what
I see in science education.
No, no, no, listen, I'm not in disagreement with that.
Look, you can, this idea is just a little bit forgiving for that comparison.
That's why somebody like Nietzsche could be very dangerous as he said himself because
you can use these ideas in all manner of wrong way, you know, like you have some so-called
postmodernist philosophers, people like De Reda, Foucault de Lewis, et cetera, whose
ideas were quite complex and controversial, but the way they were used, including in education,
is sometimes ridiculous, you know, but they try to base them with these philosophical
things.
I think it's very not fair.
I think it'd be interesting to outline for people for our audience, especially too that
there's a little bit of a caricature of the history of analytic philosophy that sort of
leaves out some of the struggles with foundationalism.
And this also goes over into the philosophy of mathematics, where, you know, a number
of them, including Rudolf Kornop, who's been mentioned here several times in the point,
have moved along toward saying having the sort of naturalistic posture whereby they say,
okay, well, look, science is, we're going to assume science is largely correct.
And now, how do we proceed now, because we're going to not assume, it says something foundational
about the ontological reality, but we'll say it does provide true statements.
So what can we do from there?
And from there, things like quine, quine's relativized ontology, relativize comes out,
and they were moving along to a sort of like a little bit of a lazy Susan of ontologies,
like, you know, pick the ontology one.
Now, Katie made this interesting comment earlier about the difference between, I think, is
what Hider called on tech versus ontological, whether you could argue within science about
what are the fundamental elements that your field is interested in, which is more of an
on tech consideration.
What are the things that are relevant to what we're doing?
And they may not be objects, they may not be physical objects.
And then what is the meta, what is it at the metal level that can we say something about
that?
Naturalizing metaphysics has had this benefit of holding on to what we know within science
and seeing what we can do from there, not necessarily to produce some sort of ultimate
foundation.
Is that?
And finally, Davidson like Karnaugh had this notion that collaboration between people
and having everyone debate this, the scientists involved in these various disciplines was
the way to arrive at some sort of like quote unquote real truth of what's going on, rather
than to be completely nullified.
And does that have or anything else?
I'll just say one thing about my own education experience.
Like I think that has had some very positive effects.
So because I think in philosophy of physics, one of the things people do is they think,
well, actually it's come to be that there's sort of two camps here, the camp that I was
sort of trained in was, yes, you take it to be largely correct, but probably not fully
understood.
And so the philosophers job is to go and dig deeper and say what really is going on here.
So for example, with non-locality and quantum mechanics, you know, is that really cause
and effect, stuff like that.
There's another camp of philosophers of physics though, who think, you know, maybe it's not
largely correct, maybe because they're sort of cutting corners, maybe they're not actually
doing their ontology properly, we should probably try to improve upon what they've done, or
maybe even try to try to urge them to do it differently.
Obviously, I think that first of the way that I think that's been a very positive influence
in philosophy, it's given, you know, many people kind of a fun, interesting careers,
doing science that's a little bit more sort of metaphysically oriented.
I would say certainly in terms of the influence that it would have on metaphysics, I think
like so much of, so much of the trajectory of contemporary metaphysics could be seen
as a response first to the, you know, you have the skepticism of the sort of like the
positives, the positive, sorry, I can speak, the positivists, the Carnapian era, that kind
of thing.
And then you have Klein where this is sort of rehabilitation of ontology, but like ontology
light, it's not the kind of ontology that likeness was into, this very, very, very sort
of minimal thing.
And then from there, you have this building backup of the field of metaphysics, but in
this very, especially with David Lewis, right, with this very, very intensely naturalistic
spirit, right?
So like, can we do metaphysics in this way that is cohesive with the practice of the
natural sciences, or maybe even much more strongly, like, and I don't think this would
have been what Lewis thought, but what a lot of people think, like in service to the natural
sciences can be like metaphysics can like trim around the hedges at the places where the,
you know, the science is going to get a little bit confusing or you need someone to, you
know, to come in and do some cleanup or say, what exactly does this mean?
Or maybe metaphysics can, I guess, like, so Ted Sider has argued that one thing that metaphysics
can do is just provide like explanatory tools or resources that could be useful in the discussion
of the natural sciences to try to figure out exactly what we're doing.
I think that there is increasingly strands of thought in metaphysics that push back against
that and say, well, no, that's like, we're doing a lot more than that.
You know, there's a lot that's going on in metaphysics that isn't necessarily related
to the, you know, the sort of foundational claims or isn't necessarily just in the spirit
of like, like, highly minimalist ontology or things like that that is more just like,
again, questions about what the world is like, the nature of reality, which might be questions
about the fundamental, but they might not, but that aren't necessarily going to be addressed
by empirical means.
And sometimes that might be with an assumption of realism.
Sometimes it might be with like more to try to argue for a certain type of deflationism.
But the cool thing about any of these debates is that they all kind of end up being debates
about metaphysics.
You know, philosophers like Nelson Goodman who tried to give this like incredibly metaphysics
free view of the world and end up with like one of the craziest metaphysics out there.
So it does end up always being debates about the nature of reality that aren't empirical
one way or another, even if you're trying to argue that, you know, there's no there there.
Sorry, I'm sorry about that.
I was on mute.
I was a bit of fantastic conversation.
I wonder if people feel it would be a good time to open up questions from our audience
because we do have some that have accumulated.
Does that sound okay to everybody?
Sure.
Great.
Great.
Thank you for Alex to come in.
Okay.
Yeah, people, you could write questions in the Q&A in the bottom panel or if you're on
YouTube right in the comments on the live.
So we first have a.
We have wind shorts.
It's sort of referencing was said earlier.
So from elementary zilch particles to persons, what about the other way?
Given what we are able to do, what we take ourselves to be, does our understanding slash
claims about the elementary particles allow us to get to us, emergent properties emerging
from what?
And then they also add maybe a zilch particle is a person with almost everything left out,
top down rather than bottom up.
So any thoughts to that question?
That sounds like live minutes to me.
That's right.
I mean, he was a fantastic metaphysician, I think.
I mean, so it's his ideas, live minutes, his ideas sound pretty wild to us today, but
it's sort of, it's interesting that it takes someone like live minutes and compare them
to what people or metaphysicians are doing today.
Live minutes in certain sense, he was like his age is greatest physicist and then thought
he just needed to go further.
And so he thought the only way you can really under, the only way you can sort of really
explain all of the stuff you know in physics is by having this additional layer, the monodology.
And therefore, not that I understand that stuff at all, but it certainly does.
You know, he ends up having mind and body come together in the fact that the fundamental
things are these mental things, the monads.
Now, I take it actually, I'm no expert on this, but is that I'm sure someone else here
does is this not somewhat similar to like Chalmers, for example, today, David Chalmers.
It related to something because monads are the kind of atoms of the soul.
So they windows into the or rather windows without windows if I can put it that way.
But in lightness as opposed to somebody like, let's say, others coming from quantum theory
or even in mathematics, there is such a thing as in in top of theory as things without points,
you know, so the monads that they it monads could be read, not by Leibniz himself, as
the image of our interaction with the world.
Leibniz of course, made an assumption, which was metaphysical and realist.
You are absolutely right in terms of his problem, but I doubt that we can never get as Greg
suggested earlier from elementary particles to the this as a kind of level.
I think in the time of Leibniz, there was a little simpler picture of the layers of reality.
I think right now we have this incredibly complex picture of the layers of reality because even
in fundamental physics, we obviously cannot reconcile quantum field theory and relativity,
which is a huge problem.
And nobody knows how it's going to happen.
But I do agree with you that bringing up monads is a very, very interesting point that Leibniz
who was very different from Newton in terms of his calculus and things like that type,
but his idea of monads is a quite a remarkable idea, which tried to push it obviously beyond
and see how we, there is a metaphysics and that sounds.
So Leibniz's metaphysics, as soon as you come to the monodology is of course an idealist
but of course, no of course, no, it's completely the opposite of a physicalist metaphysics,
which started as a matter of a particle.
And then it comes somehow because the question was about the relationship between persons,
if I got that right, and elementary particles.
So we are talking about two different domains here, which are very hard to reconcile.
What is that?
The Shakespeare line says, we'll come and unwilt on thing at once.
It's hard to reconcile.
You know, that's really the question is, and do we need to necessarily reconcile it?
Yeah, that's the question.
Yes.
Well, but then we go back to Hans's question about Chalmers, for any way that panpsychism
seems to constantly reemerge in these conversations, right, every so often, we hear more about
it.
And I guess Leibniz was one of the most colorful proponents of that sort of approach, right?
Well, I don't think he was panpsychist in that way as some of the people who come from
Chalmers' problem do not everyone.
I think, you know, no, no, Leibniz, I think was more idealist, as Carl just said, that
it doesn't mean that he projected any form of consciousness on material things.
You know, Berkeley was contemporary of Leibniz.
So I think I think it was a somewhat different view from flanpsychism, in my view.
Oh, yeah.
I just want to add, when wrote as Hans was talking about Chalmers, they mentioned Nagel.
I think they're referring to Thomas Nagel.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Well, thank you, Wynn.
So you have a question from a team music on YouTube.
He wrote a few things, I'm just going to get to one, just because other people are writing
in questions.
So they wrote, how do you define consciousness?
And then which aspects do you focus on when you try to define it?
And with what?
Yeah, anyway, so.
It's a small question.
Yeah, keep it to a few words, please.
Simple as possible.
Can we all just think the answer?
David, show or not tell?
I guess just to add, because I know there was a comment made about neuroscience and I
guess the limitations of metaphysics within how neuroscience is currently applied.
And so having done, I'm currently a research tech within a neuroscience lab.
Yeah, the lab I'm generally using more behaviorist techniques to try to deduce depression and
satiation with regards to anodonia.
So I'm not obviously, I'm not like a distinguished panelist here, but it's definitely hard for
a neuroscience perspective to sort of answer that question given that it's very much
caromentalized and limited to whatever field that the neuroscience is looking in, in terms
of their research.
I also didn't want to belittle that question, it's a perfectly great question actually.
Oh yeah, I just needed just a gigantic one.
If I was to answer honestly, and succinctly, I would say, in terms of like, how do you
define consciousness, I would say I don't.
Right.
I don't make that attempt.
I think it's also perhaps one of these areas.
There may be quite a few in metaphysically rich areas of philosophy where there might
not be a single thing that we're talking about here.
There might be multiple overlapping things that we care about that sort of give rise
to this cluster of features that we care about and that are great, you know, phenomenological
and normative importance to us.
So I wouldn't even, I mean, I'm not a philosopher of mine, but I wouldn't even begin to know
where to start trying to define consciousness.
And sometimes these definitional projects seem like the kind of thing that are doomed
to failure.
So for something as rich as consciousness, yeah, we've got to have no idea.
Yeah, there's certainly no single agreed upon definition of consciousness when you look
into all these consciousness studies related fields of research.
And even if you go back into 1904, there's this very influential paper that William James
published, which at the title does consciousness exist question mark and he even would deny
that consciousness exists in the sense that it has no ontological quality to it.
It's something very superficially would say.
1904.
Well, Freud started as a neuroscientist and the originally scientific project of scientific
psychology was a kind of attempt to relate memory to neurons.
But of course he gave up because he knew that's not possible.
You're a mute out.
Okay, go to the next question.
Thank you, team music.
Constance old on zoom wrote, would it be possible to use a metaphor from another discipline,
I use word metaphor in another field of study?
Can you repeat the question?
Yeah, maybe Constance could rewrite it.
Go to the next one, but they wrote, would it be possible to use a metaphor from another
discipline, for example, use a word metaphor in another field of study?
I could go on the next one and ask her to write and flesh it out.
I wonder whether whether that refers to the idea that, you know, for us to understand
something, we often borrow metaphor or anyway, analogies from other disciplines.
It seems that physics is often the favored one because based on our earlier conversation,
it's thought to be the foundational science, let's say, and we borrow some ideas from physics
and important to chemistry and biology and computer science and neuroscience, et cetera.
And then the question is it always should always be barred in that direction from what
used to be considered a lower tier like physics in the upper tier.
These are such a things borrowed in the other direction.
That's how I, that's the sense I make of the question.
I think working with metaphors is very important and also useful, but you have to memorize that
it's a metaphor because if you don't do that, at the end of the day, you think everything
is physics.
If you use physical metaphor, that should be avoided.
Well, and of course, physics uses a lot of metaphors.
All of them, it's just the question that I, Harold, is completely right.
You have to keep in mind the level of its application because it could be useful to explain some
of these things at a certain level, but it has limits, but it's extremely productive
analogy and metaphor.
And it goes in both directions.
I mean, it's quite clear, you know, if you read people like Heisenberg, Bohr, Hermann
Wahl, all these type of people, a very rich metaphoric field from all manner of things,
but it's a level of explanation, which you have to constantly keep in mind the limits
of its application because there's no distemptation to think that metaphor explains it, but it
nails it, but it doesn't.
There's some interesting discussion about this actually with the uses of teleological
metaphors in the naturalistic sciences, so a lot of scientific research or scientific
papers will avail themselves of Taylor's like strongly, teleological language.
So they'll say like, you know, the X wants to fight or it's designed to fight or it's
like all this kind of stuff.
Talking about things as though they're purposive or that they have intention or, and if you
ask people about this, they will say, Oh, of course, it's just a metaphor.
It's just a metaphor.
It's not to be taken seriously.
But then sometimes if you dig down a little bit into the details of the theory, it looks
like actually the teleological explanation is pulling a lot of weight.
It's not obvious just how metaphorical the teleological language is because some of the
explanations that are being offered in the theory are sort of relying on the idea that
the explanations are counterfactual in some way, they're relying on the idea that there
is this almost sort of explanatory oomph to the idea of teleology that's it's not clear
how naturalistically supported that is.
So I think it's a good example of a place where sometimes the metaphors that we use,
we can kind of dismiss them and say, Oh, it's just a metaphor.
We're not taking it seriously, but in the actual practice of giving explanations here,
it's not clear just how seriously people are taking the metaphors, which I think is really
interesting.
Well, that's very true because at early stages of quantum theory, the phrase nature makes
a choice was really very big discussion.
Yeah.
It took a lot of time to explain it on the other hand Einstein, of course, as a brilliant
rhetorician, he was an atheist, but he knew that to say that God played dice makes your
statement immortal.
If you just say nature played dice, nobody will pay attention.
Yeah.
Also, you know, it's interesting to go back to this very quick reference to Nagel, which
I think which is Nagel that he referred to in his discussion about consciousness, what's
it like to be a bad?
And it's interesting to think how much metaphor is a lot of what consciousness is about in
some way, right?
Because we, if what it's like to be is sort of asking a metaphor, a question about a metaphor,
isn't it?
Ultimately.
I mean, actually, what Nagel wanted to point out with this is that the experiential quality
of a mental state is different from the neuroscientific description of a mental state.
Yeah, absolutely.
He was a sort of precursor of what later Dave Chalmers called the hard problem of consciousness
or other people called the explanatory gap between qualitative experience on one side
and brain functioning on the other side.
And this was, I mean, Tom Nagel's paper was a very important paper.
Historically, because the term consciousness was actually out of discussion.
It was almost like a forbidden term from the beginning of the behaviorist school, like
Skinner and others, right?
They didn't talk about consciousness at all.
So between the beginning of the 20th century and 1974, I think when Tom Nagel's paper appeared,
consciousness was not it was just like exercise, even from psychology, where it intrinsically
belongs to action, right?
Constance also commented to consider political science.
They referenced justice as an example.
Any comments you could add to that given what else has been said about metaphors?
The topic of justice.
Yeah, like with regards to way to discuss with metaphors.
If there's not much you think he could add, I could go on to the next question.
I just thought to mention it because she wrote that as you guys were talking.
Okay, I'll go to the next one.
Let's see.
Don't worry, Scott.
I see your comments.
I'll get to you.
There's one question on YouTube before you from Johannes Wecky.
I hope I didn't mingle your last name.
They wrote is physics necessary for metaphysics?
Well, in what sense of necessary I'm going to get in some sense, physics is necessary
for reality.
Well, yeah, they will.
So they wrote is it well, they wrote in the sense of like, can you study it without a
good understanding of physics?
But I think there's also that other that other realm that you were sort of referencing that's
also I think quite interesting to discuss.
I mean, I think that the answer to that question has a lot to do with what we discussed earlier
about different methods in metaphysics because I actually do think that my sense is there
is a movement among metaphysicians where they're like, yeah, we really got to know our physics
because otherwise, you know, we at least need to have a, you know, know enough about the
things we say latch up to it the right ways.
But I take it there's other metaphysicians who think, you know, the part of reality I'm
focused on, yeah, it's not really physics, so it doesn't really matter that much as I'm
not, you know, very up to speed and physics.
So I think it kind of depends on the metaphysicians methodological presuppositions.
Yeah, I mean, speaking just as someone who does metaphysics for a living, like I don't
know very much physics at all.
I could just be bad at my job.
So I think it depends exactly as Kansba saying on like any field, there's disputes about
how, you know, the best methodology for practicing in that field.
And so there are definitely people who think, yeah, I know we need to be able to understand
what the science is saying so that we can understand how to make our metaphysical theories not
only consistent with the science, but also know like at what point is it time to hand
over the mic to the meta physician to say like here's where empirical inquiry runs out
and so the meta physician might have something to say.
I mean, a lot of the work that I do is on stuff about the nature of social reality, like
can we make sense?
What do we mean if we say that something is socially constructed?
Like is that can we make sense of that claim?
There's about 10 different things at least that people seem to mean like at the same
time when they say that.
Are social kinds real?
Are they different from national kinds?
Like for me doing that, I don't necessarily think that knowing a lot of physics would
be helpful to me for that explanatory reason that we talked about earlier.
I need to know a lot more about areas of the social sciences.
And so I think it partly depends on the fun thing about metaphysics is that there's like
metaphysics of X for most any X.
So partly depends on what kind of metaphysics that you're doing.
It partly also depends on what you think the project of metaphysics is and what the task
of metaphysics is.
I have an interesting follow up question I propose both to you Elizabeth.
But all the panelists I want to hear how it has to say about this as well.
But when one performs an experiment on let's say in any particular scientific field that
may test different metaphysical views of the world, does that turn the metaphysics into
physics or neuroscience or social science?
Like does it move it across the line from what was formerly metaphysical?
If you're able to extinguish with two different forms of metaphysics one understanding?
Well clearly not necessarily because in some aspects of psychology and sociology you do
that in a different way.
I think it has a lot of historical and ideological baggage this debate because to get what you
talk to Greg's friend Aristotle because the term physics coming from physics and nature
emerged through modern science like why this type of meaning because in 18th century the
word nature referred as much to human nature.
So I think that what was said about different levels of metaphysics that you could certainly
have a metaphysics in a real sense of explaining nature without physics if you give nature
a broader meaning which nature deserves incidentally.
So from that point of view I think the answer is it really has a big historical and cultural
baggage because of the dominance of science even relating to the form the terms of nature
and understanding nature.
It goes back to as Greg said the reduction is a problem that when I was young so much
younger than today I thought to my physics professor that I have difficulty with chemistry
and he said of course you have difficulty with that because chemistry does not exist.
So it's only it's only physics but it is wrong.
It's not true.
So I think that I do agree that the and Harold that it's metaphysics is defined what your
system X is which I mentioned before the metaphysic is the X additional level of the system X
and your system does have to be physics.
It can't be social, ethical, moral or whatever and that's why I think as it was said before
by Professor Halverson I believe that physicists tend to have a kind of agreement in terms of
demarcating the field they do but the metaphysicians have a much more complex stratification of
what they do as a field.
You know they do different things under the name of metaphysics.
I wanted to add something to to Gerys question which actually I thought Greg might respond
to because Abner Schimone and I think Greg you were working with Abner Schimone for a
long time he coined the notion of experimental metaphysics which seems to be contradiction
in terms because experiments are never metaphysical experiments are experiments that provide knowledge
so they are epistemologically grounded.
But I think what Schimone meant to say what they were meant to describe but this idea
is that you can if you have a good theory that comprises something that you would ascribe
to a metaphysical domain and also comprises something how the metaphysical domain might
appear to us when we do an experiment then you can do the following you can test two
different theories which have metaphysical which have different metaphysical presuppositions
and also have different experimental realizations by doing the experiment and then you can backward
infer by the result of the experiment which was the correct metaphysical assumption within
that theory right.
So this is exactly what happens in in bell type experiments you have two different metaphysical
assumptions we have the assumption of local realism and non-local realism both assumptions
give you different predictions for bell type experiments and then what you find is that
in the experiments one of the assumptions is violated right.
This is a nice example of this seemingly contradictory notion of experimental metaphysics.
Well, so I agree and that really gets down to the question of what is metaphysics like
so for example of clearly ontologies part of metaphysics.
So if you're a physicist and you say well I'm with Newton I believe that things are corpuscular
or I'm with the other people who believe that there are waves and those are the fundamental
things and so which is right and then that changes your ontology but that's the extent
to which that's really metaphysical is suspect.
I mean there is an overlap and that's the interesting place if there is an overlap that you experiment
with if you can't there isn't you're not going to reject an entire deep metaphysics by any
experiment of course which is the whole point of seeing it as being oxymoronic on the other
hand that's one of the reasons I'm interested in ontological status of elementary particles
because physicists endlessly speak about elementary particles it's been going for 50 years past
the time when many people said no they're only quantum fields and I happen to believe
that they're both and you need to understand the relationship between them but you know
this is this is you know the the schmony thing which makes a lot of sense and I think when
you find yourself at the certain point in dealing with your physics it's sufficiently
difficult their novel you're faced with this question of how deeply do I need to go into
the boundary to define my at least my ontology and many of the paradoxes come from bad ontology
bad ontological assumptions which is you know part of this whole reaction that we don't
want to do any philosophy like it messes up physics well that's you know quite wrong
right but so yeah that's it very interesting.
I totally agree.
Yeah.
This is the truth the physicists are keen to reconcile their own theories with what they
understand or of metaphysicians are keen to reconcile their views with what they see as
current day physics there must be some interplay between them like they're at some point.
So I think that there's there's always going to be interplay but it's not many I I think
just to follow up on what Greg said like I'm skeptical of the idea that you could just
like wholesale you could have a metaphysical theory and then you would have like an experiment
that could just tell you that it was wrong or something even just for the simple question
and you know the fact that data always under determines theory choice or because there's
always going to be these added philosophical questions that you have to contend with which
is not at all the say that the empirical stuff is just unrelated.
So I'll give you an example that's not anything to do with physics but again this is more in
my wheelhouse so like a lot of the work that I have done recently is on the relationship
between disability and well-being and the question of like does having a disability automatically
reduce a person's well-being or their quality of life or can we make sense of claims about
disability that are made within the disability rights movement that it's like just a way
of being different but not necessarily being worse off.
Now psychologists are also interested in this claim they're very interested in the question
of the relationship between disability and well-being and there's a ton of empirical
data on it and so you might think well isn't that just an empirical claim like you should
just go and look at the science but of course when you go and look at the science for one
thing the way that they do you know the way that the experiments are structured it's kind
of like you go and you survey people and you ask them rate your happiness or rate your
life satisfaction on a scale of one to ten.
Now that is really interesting data what it actually tells me about what I as a philosopher
I'm interested in when I'm thinking about well-being is a very complicated question and there's
all sorts of things about like comparing different people and there's also different things that
they might mean by disability and different you know the study populations that they're
looking at so I think it would be a mistake for me as a philosopher interested in disability
to just pretend like that data doesn't matter.
That data is incredibly interesting and important to me but I also think it would be a mistake
for me to be like oh this thing that I'm interested in it's just an empirical question because
psychologists are studying it too I need to look at their data and be like okay what do
I think any of this means and how if at all does it relate to this philosophical question
that I'm interested in and might there be ways that I as a philosopher might be critical
of some other methodology or say I don't think that this shows what you think it shows or
various things like that.
So I think similar things can often be said about the relationship between a philosophical
and great and an empirical inquiry I'm sure Hans has thoughts on this.
I mean I think this all I mean I'm actually sort of coming up with new thoughts as we go
because it was very interesting inputs I was also really grateful to hear Greg's reflection
I mean I've got a great abner's a great hero in philosophy of physics and he's also a great
hero for really trying to I mean in one way reviving the philosophical spirit in physics
sort of you know physics is exciting because physics tells us stuff about what metaphysicians
have been asking about for ages.
So the one thing I'll just say is like I mean this is just sort of off the cuff a little
bit I don't know where the line is between empirical science and metaphysics or even
just philosophy in general in some sense it often has to do I'm this is going to be an
oversimplification but often I think has to do with the normative right so that the you
know what should be the case.
And I think they can come up in a lot of different ways one is this the simple way of language
engineering in other words like we have choices about how to use words and the thing is though
in science often I think that's kind of forgotten right because you have these sort of you know
the terms are fixed you know you ask a person you make a survey you say how do you feel
you know is your pain level you know 10 or whatever but we don't say like what should
we mean by you know the term well being or things going well stuff like that so I think
that's something we're philosophers we have a bit more of a degree of freedom to say maybe
we should change the way we're talking about this.
And then also I think we're always sort of looking over our shoulders and thinking in
philosophical inquiries like and so so I you know Elizabeth brought out the keyword that
you know in flop we always say what does it mean and the thing is I think that often is
like what should I do about it right so it's like it's not just the data sitting there
it's like so I wake up tomorrow what shall I do in the light of this fact so and that's
true an experiment can't tell you what to do right I mean experiment you get okay that's
the result of the experiment you can hold on to the old worldview if you want to you
know that's again the theory under theories under determined by data so I think it's a
super interesting question you know but it's man I this is maybe one of the things again
where you just say maybe we shouldn't try to give a shark you know this is where the
science stopped and this is where the the metaphysics begins although I think it's also
bad to sort of like look there there's of course territorial battles sadly in current
culture the humanities whatever counts as humanity's usually lose right so in other words
like people think all just science you know all you do is the science and the rest of
that stuff is like you know somebody somebody has to you know sit in those chairs that exist
in the humanities buildings but in my sense is really good to remind to remind people that
the experiments there's a lot more to discuss after the results come in.
Great you want to move on to the next question?
Yeah so how many more are you feeling because I have four from people I haven't asked so
how are we feeling about?
We feel four is that okay or?
I think four might do it let's see how we feel.
Okay yeah so it's going to be Scott then Walter then you know just so people know because
I saw Walter was posting a few times just to make sure he knows I got him anyway so Scott
thank you Scott for writing a question it's kind of a run on so I'll try to fix it up
he could lamb basme later he's my friends so if I get it wrong he could critique me later
but I'll try my best so he wrote is there any middle ground between the idea that science
and mathematics are our human interpretation of the world and that there is only the human
perspective on the world and there's no view from nowhere and then as an aside I think
because that's sort of a question in terms of I guess idea an idealized world but he seems
to then suggest that in terms of how it's actually done there seems to be only a human
world the world and a scientific realism that seems to be the default attitude for most
Americans in the 21st century that science and mathematics are the fundamental structure
reality and our study of these fields therefore allows access to such structure.
Well this is a little bit what Hans brought up was bringing out raising earlier as a concern
right this idea what has been unleashed when we think of scientific study as being a social
construct right.
Well it doesn't seem to be a question about so much social construct that's an additional
level of that discussion because you could use the view that we only have human interaction
with the world through mathematics and technology and the social dimension was as additional
question in all these debates in the so-called social studies of science few years back and
social constructivism that was involved to what degree you know there is a symmetry between
social sciences and natural sciences from that point of view and there is much more complex
view on this point now but I am all this little bit uneasy with people looking for a third
way or way sort of in between because it seems to me that one could perfectly do well science
under the assumption which as I said people like Niels Bohr and that it is about our
interaction with the world through the experiment the technology etc rather than making the
claims concerning making such a claim that the nature even in the physics level is described
by mathematical equations and things of that type of window I do know that many people
do believe in that but I would call this unfalsifiable metaphysical assumption because you know look
von Neumann made similar type of thing he believed that quantum mechanics described the
independent behavior of the and only experiment and their fears was that and brings in probability
etc but I think it's an unfalsifiable ontology the only thing we can falsify is what we see
the experiment and how well our theories predict that but I don't think we can the advantage
of seeing the world in terms of interaction in scientific theory and technology is falsifiability
you know for me even the theory of relativity even the most people believe that it but not
all there are philosophers of science who I think push or don't believe that general relativity
actually describes it's an idealization which enables us to predict very important effects
right I think this position allows us to do science and it is you can say it is a form
of metaphysics because it makes an unfalsifiable ontological assumption about the fact that we
cannot describe or represent the universe but it's different from making assumption that
we can because there is a symmetry in them because that assumption is non falsifiable
there is no way in my view to falsify the assumption that the nature is described by
any mathematical equations apart from our existence on the other hand I can perfectly
well falsify theory such as quantum mechanics classical physics which can predict experiments
some of which has a kind of metaphysical flavor not only Bell theorem rightly brought up by
Harold but even the double slit experiment initially Schrodinger and Heisenberg's views
of quantum mechanics were very different metaphysically so it's all so in any event I don't think
I understand the temptation of the third way or the temptation of scientific realism but
I don't think they're necessary and it's not made a matter of welcome razor it's a totally
different question why one take one position or another on that I cannot explain why I
take this interactive position versus scientific realism I don't know that I think it's very
difficult to explain maybe Elizabeth can explain that because she deals in her domain you deal
precisely with discretion they are psychological historical philosophical they're not mathematical
there is no explanation why I believe in that type of position I can offer some but I could
be a scientific realist but I'm not okay thank you Scott fish fine you didn't do it
yeah he said he's on the train so I'll relay him later if he missed out he told me later
if I didn't mess up how he wanted that asked so thank you Scott so next we have three more
so this is from Walter K. Lou thank you Walter they wrote I'm gonna use the latest when he
wrote which he wrote as meta linguistic and meta perceptual activities respectively to
what extent are poetry and cinema both physics and metaphysics in the senses discussed today
that's an interesting one well I mean it right they partake of metaphysical subject matter
right or their subjects might encourage a metaphysical reflection is that a fair way
to frame it out everybody also like what comes straight to mind is a lot of movies both very
popular and even I guess more was seen as high art are using the multiverse concept in their
storytelling now right like everything everywhere all at once the recent movie I was mentioning
to you earlier yeah yeah and then another one I was thinking so obviously it's being used
in the Marvel Cinematic Universe for the more pop culture reference and then another one
I thought of as you guys are talking was it was a short series by the guy Alex Garland
on Hulu called devs which was about sort of Silicon Valley company making a computer that
sort of predicted sort of predicted how you just I guess some examples that come off the
top my head with the flesh out the cinema aspect of that question yeah so I think actually
one really interesting way and maybe where these places can interact is that maybe especially
speculative fiction to pick up on that can give really really interesting thought experiments
for thinking about metaphysical theories that is good sort of this is again one way in which
I think you can think about the way that metaphysical inquiry goes beyond pure empirical inquiry
because you're thinking about situations that you know by their nature don't exist but nevertheless
might tell you something interesting about the nature of reality if they give problems
for your theory so you know very often when we're talking about the metaphysics of persons
for example somebody's going to mention something that happened in Star Trek the next generation
because here's a thing that happened when there are two rikers after they go through
the transporters and what like which one is the real riker and I think I don't just
think that that is people goofing off I think it's that like interesting questions about
how we think about ourselves can be raised by purely fictional scenarios that allow us
to sort of like filter out the noise of the everyday world a little bit and just think
about like well what is the nature what do we care about when we care about personhood
what do we care about when we care about survival there are also really interesting questions
just about like you know what is the nature of fictional representation like how is it
both like true that Frodo took the ring to Mount Doom and also true that Frodo doesn't
exist because there's no such thing as Hobbits and things like that so like well these are
the kind of puzzles that philosophers worry about so there definitely is like interesting
overlap.
Great stuff. Alright when I move on I think we want to get through these last two if possible.
Yeah yeah so it's just Ruth and Ena so Ruth wrote a comment a question the comments I
think pretty funny was not a question it was I like the point that those claim to shed
the metaphysics often have the wildest implicit metaphysics I just like to add also that when
I heard that I generally think of Neil deGrasse Tyson because I think it's a fortune a lot
of science communicators I'm kind of resort to those viewpoints I think like him also Lawrence
Krauss I think he's been kind of discredited due to me too but then also Sam Harris a little
bit when he talks about philosophy I kind of tune out because it's not it's not great
anyway to their question they wrote why would metaphysicians need to know physics rather
than chemistry I think as a comment made to the previous question without already assuming
that chemistry reduces the physics which is a hefty assumption.
Any quick answers to that I it doesn't turn to know chemistry and physics you're muted
arcadey you're you're immune but you can stratify it you can have metaphysics of chemistry as
you know it's true that the philosophy of chemistry was a very marginal aspect of the history of
philosophy of science but actually it is an extremely interesting or even history and philosophy of
chemistry so you can certainly have a metaphysics of chemistry and or you can have I do think that
if you take the emergence view you would you would qualify that any claims you make and
concerning the metaphysics in terms of fundamental physics could have limit in other domains so I
think you have two approaches there and that from that point of view just like you can have
metaphysics of biology or the unconsciousness or whatever you know or sociological things I think
you can perfectly well have metaphysics of chemistry or philosophy of chemistry without assuming that
it is reducible to physics even though at some level you can make this assumption it just practically
is not true because a lot of chemical phenomena cannot be explained by in terms of physics in
very practical terms and it has its own history and its own scientific thinking which is very
long going all the back to alchemy and things of that time. Just to pick up on the bit from
risk question I just think was really interesting this this idea of metaphysical inquiry is kind of
inevitable like you just always end up doing it is like even just the very question of whether
metaphysicians need to know metaphysics sorry they do need to know metaphysics whether metaphysicians
need to know physics is itself this really substantial metaphysical question like you just
the annoying thing about this these questions but also kind of the cool thing about them is that
like you you just run into them constantly you can't get away from them. Okay I would also
just like to add I've heard sort of the the same thing talked about physics from mathematicians where
they say oh physics isn't real math is right because usually they nitpick the fact that in physics
you make a lot of assumptions while you shut the pill from the ground up and math so it's the
cycle continues I guess they say and then I guess last but not least so I have to find it on okay
Enoch, Aldina thank you Enoch they wrote in what is the role of language in metaphysics?
Another small question yeah very the beginning there was such an important yeah it's important
right anyone want to take a shot at that?
Well I maybe we can reference some we made a number of references to sort of the
tradition of analytic philosophy which is all about that question
but by the way I made a reference earlier to Karnaugh and Davidson as people who are
seeking consensus within the discipline I meant Richard Vordi not Donald Davidson
what I meant in that comment about different how different fields can you rely on sort of
democratic process among your participants to settle on what the truth might be or anyway
what they're striving for the truth but I'm sorry I just didn't object because Walter I think
wanted more of the emphasis in poetry and cinema as inherently inquiries into language and perception
in and of themselves so I think I could kind of add to it to what Enoch was asking and also to
maybe better answer what Walter wrote previously sorry
so anyone else want to say something about linguistics and it's a big topic
Wittgenstein in the end of Treg Thetas my language is my world you know so I think it's
irreducible because there is no language result thought and there is no thought result language
so the language plays a huge role and actually in the history of quantum mechanics there are
people including Reisenberg who reflect that as well as more on the necessity or even common
language that you cannot avoid it you know so I think that that's the but it will be used different
I'd love to I love the I mentioned of Wittgenstein this context because we've mentioned how so many
people so many thinkers have said they want to do without metaphysics and then develop their own
terrible metaphysics or rely on it anyway I think Wittgenstein is a wonderful and elegant
example of someone who tried his darndest to sort of get rid of metaphysics or any way to be
an anti-metaphysician and yet he's created industry of metaphysics so I which is a lot more elegant
and sophisticated than some of the other folks we've touched on um anyway I want to thank everyone
I think you've had an incredibly stimulating conversation and I'm not surprised to find that
I'd love for it to continue on further I want to thank you all for participating and I hope you
all will consider coming back in the future for other PLX talks to be determined we're going to
be starting up again as I said in the fall and we will be sending out announcements to all of our
audience members about when that will take place almost certainly sometime in September
anyway thank you all again that was been wonderful thank you Mr. Dope thank you thank you everybody bye bye
it's unmeasable if you say that so how how do we get out of here
you just I'm worried about that but let's talk about it yeah so well yeah at least they they they
attract people
you
