I'm Ed Nersesian, the Director of the Center.
Today's program, Mind Matters,
Past, Present and Future, and the
participants are, please raise your hand when I call your name.
John Krakower, who is Professor of
Neurology at Neuroscience at Johns Hopkins University.
Jonathan Kramnick,
who is Maynard Mack, Professor of English at Yale University.
George McCarry, who is Director of the
Wheat Wallace Institute for the History of Psychiatry and Professor at
Wile Cornell, Ken Miller, Professor of Neuroscience at
Columbia University, and Barbara Montero,
Professor of Philosophy at the University of New York.
They are aware that they just start spontaneously
with a conversation and we'll see where they end up.
Thank you. Sorry. Maybe we could just begin by saying something about the perspective that
we bring to the question. One of the interesting and
attractive features of this afternoon, for me at least, is that
I am sitting with people who are bringing
expertise from a variety of different disciplines
and none of them my own. So I'd be curious to know
simply how you all approach this issue, which is for me a literary
and cultural question, though I'm always excited to
think about questions of mind, consciousness, and mental life from
an interdisciplinary perspective and bringing into account
developments in neuroscience, cognitive science, and philosophy.
So now I will pass the torch off to someone else.
So, in understanding the mind, are you looking
at literature? Are you looking at
does this literary story reveal the nature of the mind?
Or does the author of the literary story have insight?
Or who's inside are you
benefiting from in that project?
Well, I'm probably the authors, but I kind of focus on questions
of the representation of mental life and work to literature.
Yeah. And how it's changed, I guess.
How it's changed or how it took shape in a particular moment in time. And one of the
exciting things about working in my particular historical field, which is the 18th
century, is that at that moment in time,
literary writers were in pretty close dialogue with scientists and philosophers.
It's part of the emergence of empiricism and all kinds of work into
the nature of cognition and the nature of representation, perception,
and other kinds of questions in and around mental life that have
posed problems that people are still interested in addressing.
Sounds interesting.
And so to me, that side of it is simple.
I think how consciousness arises from me is not
simple, and in fact I don't even see how you can approach that as a question.
But it's obvious to me that this piece of meat that evolved is
the basis of our mind.
I guess I approached it from two vantage points, which is that I'm a working
psychiatrist, and that does no doubt in form of some of my perspective.
But my work has been in the history of ideas, so I would really take often away from
your point of view and say one of the things that intrigued me and
made me write my last book was the notion that we've been living with this problem
for many, many years, with centuries, and that to think of it as an inside of a problem
was fine, but not as interesting as a problem that in a way had its own history,
had political history, had a scientific history, had a philosophic history,
that impacted us as we couldn't solve it, and moved forward to different iterations
of ways of thinking about it.
So I really look at it in a way much like you do.
I was interested in what happens once we take the, let's say, I don't think it's quite
innocent to say it comes from the meat, but then all the difficult problems, as you say,
come after the meat.
I guess it comes with a dessert.
We don't know what makes it dessert.
I think it's a mad story and we've got to go through the lens of history of ideas.
Sean, please.
Oh, gosh.
Yeah, I always try to think to myself how I feel being an audience, and I think topics
like this are so amorphous and abstract that, so how does one get some
concreteness on it?
That's what people think of me by mind.
I mean, it's a slightly human, self-absorbed idea that that's what's making us create
all the specialties that we represent.
And then that's what Ken just said, which is he's a neuroscientist.
In neuroscience, we don't talk about the mind.
We talk about the brain.
So the mind is what psychologists and cognitive certain neuroscientists talk about,
and it's what we all consider, as I said, the creator of all the things we care about,
and then the neuroscientists talk about brain, and then we get this tedious thing.
How are we going to bridge the brain and the mind?
And the answer to that is, we're not.
And what do I mean by that?
It means that, and I'll give you a tiny little anecdote.
Ken probably knows this.
Génelia, does everyone know what Génelia research campus is?
It's a big campus for neuroscience, and they've just decided that they're going to switch
directions and do something they call mechanistic cognitive neuroscience.
Meaning that they're going to spend 15 years to do the bridge between the brain of a fruit fly
and cognition.
So they're going to try and operationally define what could possibly be the bridge between mind and brain.
And the way they're going to do it is they're going to have to come up with some operational definition of cognition.
So I think we can have a fruitful discussion here that we agree that we're going to talk about cognition.
Thought, if we will, conscious of that, that's it.
Cognition.
Now, depending on how you operation define cognition, you can decide that we are going to have a scientific theory of the mind.
That is neuroscientific, not psychological, and just the last point I want to make is that it's extremely important
to say that all the interesting work on the mind to date, in my view, has been psychological, not neuroscientific.
And in philosophy, we talk about functionalist explanations versus reductionist mechanistic explanations.
If you say to somebody, why is that woman crying there in the corner, and you say it's because she's sad,
because she lost a loved one, that is a perfectly adequate explanation.
To say it's because circuits in her head are misfiring, or dopamine levels are low, is not an adequate explanation.
Now, anyone who says, oh, and you know, and they're molecules of the moment, oxytocin is very big at the moment,
dopamine was really big, and these molecules get this totemic meaning that we think are bridging, and they're not.
So as soon as we move away from causal bridges between the brain and the mind, and decide the kind of work we want to do,
I think you have to be perfectly happy with saying the woman is sad, and never talk about dopamine.
And any attempt to think that you'll explain away the notion of sadness by some reduced circuit or molecular-based exclamation
is a philosophical aporia. It's a non-place.
And that, I think, is where we're going to happen.
And I think many people in the audience really hope that the neuroscientists will solve the mind.
It's a non-starting.
Okay. Well, it's interesting for me to hear different perspectives on this.
My work is very interdisciplinary, so I take into consideration literature.
That's why I was interested in how you, you know, think about it, because I've looked at Shakespeare and said,
well, you know, how did he understand the mind, which is different how the characters sometimes seem to see the springs of action.
And so, and I look at neuroscience and psychology and common sense.
I've even conducted an experiment.
And then my own case, too, introspection.
I use that too, and I mix it all together and see what comes out.
So, well, so one thing Ken said was, certainly the brain is the basis of the mind.
And, you know, one sense who wants to say, yeah, but one question I'm interested in what it means to be the basis of something else.
So, because it seems to me from different perspectives, you can see different, you could say in a different context, someone might say our socialization is the basis of the mind,
because that's what makes us who we are, or you could, in a different context, our DNA, or so, yeah,
so there's a, so one thing, so my work tends to, like, focus on some very, well, I have a variety of areas of research, but in my most, like strictly focusing on the mind and the mind body problem,
focuses on the meaning of that, what can we mean when we're looking for the basis, and also the question of, well, what is that base?
So, we all want to be somehow materialist or physicalist, but what does that mean?
And somehow is there, like, I mean, we think about the problem of reducing the mind to the brain, but, you know, we haven't reduced chemistry either to physics, so what is there something special about the mind, and its relation to the lower level features that it somehow emerges out of, or is based on, or is maybe
reduced, so as opposed to other, the other stratifications of nature, or is it just, do we have the same problems throughout, or are they just different perspectives we take on reality, so, those are some of my thoughts.
It's just that you're not, the question why is this woman crying, it's not asked, this is a question of, like, what people are interested in when they pose a question, what kind of answer they want, right?
So, if you're in a religious office, maybe if someone's crying all the time, nonstop, maybe you need to figure that out, so it might be depending on your content.
It's annoying, it's annoying, what I'm saying is, is that, you know, it's philosophy, explanation, and understanding, and causality have different meanings. Physicists have understood notions of emergence and aggregate behavior and complexity for ages.
Neuroscientists in particular, and I say this, have a kind of philosophical, sophomoric way of speaking, right, where, because they're sophisticated with their tools and their techniques, they think by inheritance, they're also intelligent about talking about these things, and they're not.
Okay, and what I'm saying is that it's not, lots of people have dealt with these problems of levels of analysis, you know, as you said, physics, chemistry, biology, phase, transitions in science, complexity, I mean, you know, I think it gets down to you, you know, the book that we're writing, I think the title I'm using right now is, what does neuroscience want to know?
And I think members of the audience are asking, why is that woman sad?
But what the answer to sound like something like dopamine?
And what I'm saying is, as long as you're in that track where you're asking a question that's never going to yield the kind of answer you feel like, it's like the number 42, I mentioned that in Hitchhiker's Guide to the Larrazie, what's the meaning of the universe?
Well, that's my face, I want something that felt like my question.
The problem is, is that we have a feeling when we ask our question and we demand that the answer have the same feel as the question, and it will not.
And as long as we accept that, we're fine, you can do causal neurology, yes, you can do cheat Parkinson's in depression and stroke, that's causal work, that's where the levels matter.
But if you're asking, understanding explanation, why is this person a good cook?
It's because they salt well, it's because they read recipes well, it's because they have a knack.
And notice that those explanations for why a cook is good, all on the Daniel Dennett's intentional level of cooking.
If you said they're good cook, they've got really good spatial working memory, right?
Or they have good selective spatial attention.
You're no longer explaining why they're a good cook, all you're doing is talking about the, perhaps, necessary but not sufficient cognitive capacities that you require to be a good composer as well.
So, to me, it's all a bit of a non-question that we like, because we all would like the feeling of an answer that we're never going to get.
I completely agree with you, but I'm much more curious rather than bored by the question, because in fact, the non-question becomes a culture.
As you know, the NIMH now demands that studies about sadness have biomarkers.
You cannot get a grant at the National Institute of Mental Health.
And so these problems, we have this capacity to sometimes manage better, in the 19th century, Hughlings Jackson said exactly what you said.
We're going to basically defer psychic causality, and we're going to look for neural causality, and we're going to start to do the same thing with psychology.
Everyone is mixing mind and brain in a mash of nonsense.
He said we're just going to look for psychological causality.
The problem is some fields and some people, like psychiatrists and their patients, walk into a situation where they're demanded.
It seems like there is a great deal of pressure to think on both sides and to prematurely integrate.
Those integrations have been usually disastrous.
And presently, I think we're in the midst of another chapter in that with the recent NIMH demand that everyone's going to have to make up a biomarker for every study they do.
You will not be able to do a clinical study on sadness.
Yeah, so that sounds right to me.
And also, I think there's something that's been historically perplexing about the relationship between physical matter and cognition or the mind in the brain over long spans of time.
So there's something, at least in the curiosity or the fad or the fetish that you're describing, John, that has cultural significance, if not also political significance.
And there's a reason why we started off in this vein, even though with the possible exception of Ken, it seems like no one here really is committed to a kind of program of reduction.
And yet, it's what bugs you, even though none of us really actually are committed to explaining in the way that you're afraid of.
Well, as I said, that's not true of NIMH.
Well, no, exactly.
Do you need the neuroscience?
Yes, right.
Genuinely believe that if you can understand heading direction through a ring attractor, a fly's brain, that you will then be able to extrapolate from that other forms of cognition.
They really do believe that.
Right?
And it's now, look, if they could explain in an argument, you know, Ken just said, I believe one day you will.
That's the religion, as far as I understand.
Right?
But if you're going to come up with a framework as to how that extrapolate, I mean, if you were to say, look, here's an ant.
Yeah.
One little ant.
And I'm going to be so intelligent that I will actually infer ant colonies and termite mounts from that one ant.
Good luck.
You never would.
Yeah.
I'm going to agree with everything you're saying.
And unfortunately, neuroscience, we study the ant because we've got great tools.
We can go deep into the ant's brain.
We will infer termite mounts, which is what cognition would be in an ant colony, as present in the present.
Right, right.
It's an emergent behavior when you have thousands of ants.
Correct.
But somehow we're going to work out how that thousands of ants work.
And there are coarse grain descriptions of complex systems like ant colonies that are very explanatory, but they're not single ants.
Right?
And you substitute ants for neurons and you can see the problem.
Yeah.
Right?
And yet neuroscientists hate this kind of argument because they're deeply in love with the reductionist work.
And it's good work, by the way.
I think at the level of the work, ants are interesting.
Neurons are interesting.
Right.
Parts of neurons are interesting.
Right?
But the idea that if you study and study and study and study and make some magical nonlinear extrapolatory moment, you'll have this new thing.
It's never happened.
I've never seen it.
Yeah.
That's the problem.
Right.
I don't agree that it's an insoluble, in principle, separation between the physical and the mental.
That will never get there.
And just as one simple example that John would know very well, but we have the experience that to see this cup and to reach for this cup and to know it's a cup and to be able to reach for it is the same thing.
Well, from study of the brain, we now know it's not the same.
That there's one system that I use to say that's a cup and it's a sort of round in a cylinder and to describe its shape.
And there's a completely different system that I use to form my hands to reach for it, know where to reach it and be able to pick it up.
And those are two separable systems.
You can lead in one or lead in the other separately.
So that's a very tiny example of where knowing something about the brain gives us some new insight into the mind that we just wouldn't get by introspection.
And I think that doesn't go very far into our daily life, but it's an example of how understanding how the real thing works is going to piece by piece little by little over a very, very long time going to revise our understanding of our mind works.
Well, actually, let me ask you though, what have we learned about the mind by knowing that the action of reaching for a cup and of gazing at a cup are served by two different systems?
We've learned about the underlying neural architecture of each and how they're distinct from each other.
Well, you mentioned that they're separate processes.
Right, but they're separate and neural.
Unified.
No, no, just to defend, I mean, just to be, this is the crux of matter to be clear.
Yeah.
What Ken is talking about is a form of modularity of process.
Right, exactly.
Okay.
Now, psychologists, Sternberg and many others who have worried about the decomposition into components of what seems like the unified brain.
So that's not implementational level work.
In other words, showing that there's dissociation of modules, showing that the seemingly unified brain mind is actually made up of these competing subsystems.
Right.
It's incredibly interesting, but that's psychology.
Right.
And then cognitive neuroscience is sort of psychology, but imaging.
Right.
But.
But I think for the benefit of the audience, actually, we might want to clarify that what we're talking about here is still actually below any level of consciousness.
Yes.
So this is about a mental process, a cognitive process in which these two modules are distinct from each other, but one can't's introspect on that at all.
So that this is in some sense what I was asking. I think many people in the audience, when they hear questions of mind are interested in something that is available to introspection is consciously experienced.
Right. And I think it's very important. I'm sure Ken and I would take the view.
I think that, and I think Dan Dennett, I was using the point to introspection.
Yes, in certain circumstances, self-report is useful in psychology.
Right.
But it's a dangerous thing to base science on, whether it's cognitive neuroscience with its computational modules, or whether it's neuroscience where you actually talk about implementation circuits.
Right.
I think they're both ways to study the brain. I think the bridge, as I said, between the brain and mind is the notion of cognition.
The best way to go after cognition, I think, is psychological experiments. Sometimes there's psychological experiments benefit from some self-report.
But I think it's very important that I do not take the view that the introspective route alone, even I think members of the audience who care about free will, consciousness, thinking would, I think, prefer cognitive neuroscience to introspection.
Okay.
And I would... The one thing I disagree is, this isn't... The dissociative... I just talked about it's not just psychology.
Without... We discovered that by understanding how two separate brain systems process things and how when you're lesion one of them, you lose one faculty.
That's neuropsychology. Neuropsychology.
Neuropsychology.
No, right. I'm just saying that if you had area A and area B and they dissociated, it's fascinating.
But unless you care that it was dorsal stream versus ventral stream, it could have been occipital cortex, could have been temporal cortex.
It's the dissociation that's interesting, not the exact anatomical location of it at the current time.
I agree with that.
Yes.
Wouldn't you have the cognitive dissociation be at some level of explanatory removed from the neural...
Why would it occur in different forms of neural location?
Well, the point is we discover it by studying the brain.
We don't discover it by studying the mind without studying the brain.
Right.
It's a leading...
Yes, you know, I understand.
It seems to me that on the one hand, we have the limits epistemologically of neural reductionism, which you made the case for very clearly.
And on the other, we do have the limits of self-report, which are obvious.
For the people who are in the lab doing this, do we not need a new model of science to understand the mind?
Are we not stuck between bad models?
I think...
Well, one thing I've found recently, and I've just...
A recent project, but I've been writing about the fact that we seem to forget the sensation of pain.
And there's quite a large psychology and some neuroscience on this.
And looking at it, it's interesting how so much of the neuroscience is still in...
Really, I mean, because what else can we do, but maybe there's a way to think about moving forward into something else,
but has to speak in terms in behavioral terms.
So about the two components of pain.
There is a distinction and maybe a dissociation, though it's not clear that there's ever been a full dissociation
between the feeling of pain and your emotional reaction.
But both are described in terms of behavior. They're identified in behavior.
So it's very difficult.
Just, I think, to get... It would be nice in my paper, I suggest, you know, that the literature on memory of pain
is also very confusing because it is hard to identify this sensory component outside of behavioral terms.
So it would be nice, I think, for the science to move forward, for the neuroscience to move forward,
to allow for neuroscientists to feel a little bit more free about not needing to identify everything behaviorally.
Now, how do you do the study? You know, you have to find some thing that goes on.
But... And this is where, I think, maybe first introspection and the neuroscience, the fMRI,
it's going to have to work hand in hand because maybe, okay, we're not going to be able to see some behavior
that a subject in a study is going to events, but we're going to have to take their word for it
that they are remembering a sensation. But it's... And we'll look at what's going on in the brain at that point.
So I feel that in moving forward, and then just in looking at that research, I wanted to suggest that it would be nice
to have a way to get subjects to identify a conscious component of what's going on.
Versus, well, what I found in the literature was a distinction between remembered pain and known pain.
But the poor subjects in these studies, there's like a 500-word description of making this distinction,
and I'm sure that's very difficult for any subject to read and really understand.
So I thought... Here I thought it was a place where philosophers who like to think a lot about this subjectivity
and what they call qualia and consciousness could help out in trying to create a protocol to offer to subjects
and studies for them to try to identify different conscious aspects of their mind, the consciousness.
So in looking at what's the core, you know, what we see is correlated with activity in the brain.
I mean, that seemed to be clear in the pain.
But even in the end, you're just going to have correlations, which are not explanations.
Oh, right.
Just to get to your question, right, I mean, there's the meteorological fallacy.
You know, PMS, Hackler, Wittgenstein, he talked about, you know, wings don't fly, birds do.
Okay, the amygdala does not feel pain, people do.
All right, so soon, now lots of, again, neuroscientists don't understand that logical fallacy.
Right, they think that parts feel rather than the... Yeah.
...the glagration of the path.
So there, you could say we don't need the difference, because there's a philosophical misunderstanding.
Okay.
But on the other hand, we do lack, in complexity science, a bridging hypothesis.
It is true that it's difficult to come up with, if I were to ask you, do you understand New York City?
I could ask everyone in this room.
What does that question mean? Do I understand New York City?
So to understand the mind is as stupid as that question, right?
Right? Do you understand New York City?
You can utter that sentence, right?
But I beg to differ.
Now, what's ever asked me that question before, I've been asked the question if I understand the mind a million times.
Right.
Why?
I'm just saying it's the same in times.
No, but let me finish.
Why do neuroscientists keep making the same mistake?
It's not because they don't understand the problems.
It's because there's a great deal of pressure on them.
Social, political, human, bless you.
Make that leap.
And so for 150 years, they keep going off the same cliff.
People keep asking them, but what about the thing that I think organizes my day every day?
And that's got to be related to these gray matters that you're talking about in these neurons.
But how is it related?
And again and again, the pressure of answering that question.
Exactly what I'm saying is...
It's a seduction.
I know, it's a seduction.
But why don't we just get over it?
In other words, what I'm saying is we can have very important causal connections made.
Causality matters, right?
But just like explaining ant colonies and weather and cities, you can't do it.
I completely agree with you, but I'll tell you the answer.
Let's just get over this.
The reason we don't get over it is you won't get grants.
Yeah, but that's why you won't get over it.
But that's not a very intellectual position to take.
I can tell my friends that they're laughing.
I would say I'm not going to be always not interrupted, just because I'm a woman.
So I'm going to interrupt a little bit.
And also I want to bring up somewhere where I think Jonathan can add, okay, I would say
things are even worse or maybe more complicated than John has just pointed out with explanation.
I mean, I would say it's partly a sociological linguistic fact that we say people think
instead of the brain.
And I think it could, I mean, we could change.
I'm very always influenced by Chomsky on his thoughts about this.
And he often points out, well, you know, in English we say birds fly and airplanes fly.
But you know, in some other languages, airplanes don't fly.
No, you know, so it's, you know, well in English and maybe today in most languages we talk about
people as thinking and not the brain.
But you know, that could change.
I mean, it's interesting you see also, I mean, I noticed in my writing, I don't want an
argument to state something.
But a lot of people say, you know, so maybe arguments are now state.
So it might be somehow also just a social fact also.
I'm not sure.
I mean, I'm willing to say there's some flexibility in what we take as a fact of the matter in this case.
Well, I would agree entirely.
I think it is.
I knew you know.
I think it's very much a social fact.
But also with an interesting history, I mean the mind-body problem goes, you know, it goes
all the way back.
And people have written interesting things about it for a very long time.
And it has affected our culture in recent years in ways that are, you know, I guess good and bad.
And certainly our arts in ways that are interesting.
There's good novels have been written about, you know, brain-based accounts of behavior and psychology.
E.M.E.Q. and Saturdays, lovely novel.
The science is wrong.
No doubt.
But it's preoccupied with, you know, the problem of reducing the experience to the brain.
But also actually I think even in everyday speech, again, going way back, you will pick up phrases
like, you know, my brain hurts or something like that when you're talking about having to think really hard about a problem.
The notion that the brain is the seat of the mind and is involved in cognition has been, you know,
obvious in one way or another for people for a very long time.
And there's all sorts of kind of like folk cultural ways of making the connections pretty quick.
And none of that I think poses any problems for your fundamental irritation with your own discipline,
though.
I think that it's actually quite compatible with it.
There's in the sense that they're not doing any explanatory work.
But it's part of the culture in which people will refer to the brain as a kind of chunky way of talking about, you know, the mind.
Yeah, I mean, if you're just, you know, in an article last year, you know, involved in cognition, that word involved, doesn't know work.
It's just a correlation or that are causal link, which none of them doubt.
Right.
In other words, if you're doing causal work, manipulative, interventional work, that's great science.
Right.
And we do, you know, but it's going to be more difficult when you say, hey, how does the brain lead to the mind?
And I'm going to go, you really go, oh, thank you.
I'm not going to have to worry about that again.
I've had my aha moment.
Yeah.
It's a nice compressed sentence has been uttered.
Yeah.
I've understood just the way you say how does a car engine work.
I think I know how a car engine works.
I want there to be a way to say how the brain leads to the mind.
When I'm saying it is not going to ever sound like the way you're being told how a car engine works.
Yeah.
And you just have to look at that.
Yeah, no, no.
And I'm just saying that most people, I think, intuited better than the reductionist scientists.
Again, I agree entirely with that.
Yeah.
I also think that there are cultural reasons and political reasons along the lines of which
order is suggesting as to why this conversation now in 2018 seems so pressing.
At least in my experience over the last decade, universities and funding agencies and everything
else, I've been preoccupied with two things in particular, neurological reduction and
what you might call kind of data or computational reduction.
So the money is in either kind of information systems or studying, using computers to sort
of provide numbers for things or it is, as you suggested, George, in putting a squiggly F
in front of something or just generally using the word neuron.
And that's an interesting sociological question.
Yeah, there's a wonderful book of anyone interested called Neuro published by Princeton University Press.
Think about five years ago by two writers where they very, very beautifully outline the sociology
of the neuro fad.
Right.
And they very much link it to what they call the neuromolecular view of the mind, which
very much came on the heels of molecular biology and molecular genetics.
So the hubris was that we told DNA makes RNA, makes protein.
We're going to do this for neurosar.
Complete failure, obviously.
But nevertheless, it was very compelling.
The Caltech story, Mary McKay wrote a history of Caltech.
And how Linus Pauli said that we studied proteins, we would extrapolate from proteins.
So this has happened over and over again, this sort of extrapolation hubris.
Right.
And now the current one isn't neurons, it's not genes, it's circuits.
Yeah, exactly.
This nauseating word that you hear over and over again.
Now it's not again, it's not that it isn't used to work.
Which is also kind of a neuro term as well.
Yeah, it's just that there's underline this good work.
There's this additional strange totemic view that this will be what gets us to the promised
land.
Right.
And it's bizarre.
So I get to where I don't quite know what we're talking about.
Well, I think it's what people really wanted to know whether the things that we talk about
as mind will ever be sub explained.
And okay, so to address.
That's what it's about.
So I'm saying not at the level of neural circuits.
So there's different things there.
So for example, I mean to understand New York City in its totality.
Yeah.
No, but we can understand a lot and we can understand more and more and we can understand
why, you know, why are the traffic patterns the way they are.
We can understand the forces that lead to that.
We can, there's a lot you can understand without saying that you ever grasp the whole thing.
But the word, right.
It seems to me you're saying if we can't.
No, no, no, no, no, no, it's more subtle than that.
When you look at work on cities, for example, Jeffrey West, the former president of Santa
V Institute, has written a wonderful book which I highly recommend called Scale, where he talks
about how the complexity of cities arises.
Any science does have ways of producing explanations about aggregate behavior, but it is non-reductionist
science.
What I'm saying is when you talk about complexity, you can find reduced forms of explanation
to discuss complex systems.
Okay.
But no one's going to talk about galaxy formation by talking about particle physics, right.
It's a different discipline.
But all I'm saying is, of course you can study cities.
The Santa Fe Institute has been studying cities for ages, but what they wouldn't say is to
understand cities to study one family.
Look, of course there's many, many levels and the very bottom level doesn't give a good
explanation of the top level.
But that's what neuroscientists think.
I don't think so.
I don't see that myself.
I think in popular culture and popular writing, there's a lot of that.
I don't see it really in neuroscientists myself.
But just to say another thing, so you were talking about what people want to know is
the mind they experience, their consciousness.
From my point of view, that's literally the tip of the iceberg.
And the iceberg being all the stuff that goes on in the brain.
It's not literally the tip of the iceberg though.
As the English professor, I'm constantly thinking, I'm going to be guilty.
And the reason why that matters is because what we experience has a lot of structure
that we don't understand, that we try to get at by introspection, by meditation, by all
kinds of means.
But a lot of that structure comes from all the stuff that's beneath the surface and not
conscious.
So to me, to understand the mind, to understand the conscious mind is a tiny piece of that.
And it's not the central question really, although for ourselves personally, that's
what we'd like to know because that's what we experience.
But we're not going to understand that without understanding this huge amount of substructure
and all the many, many levels from the bottom of the top.
That's a very, very long project.
But it's not that we're never going to get any insight.
I mean, the one thing that I would agree with, or maybe I don't know if you're saying this,
John, but I don't think we're ever going to have a scientific explanation of why the
operations of the brain and the mind and all of their structure that leads us to act in
the way that we act, why that's accompanied by subjective experience.
Why we have a conscious experience, why we're not zombies, that whole thing of a question.
I don't think that's a scientific question.
I don't think we're ever going to answer that.
We experience that when our mind does these things, they enter consciousness.
We have a subjective awareness of them.
But if you take away the subjective awareness part and just take all of the processing,
all of the things that go on by which our brain is associating ideas and understand
anything about the world and leading us to act in certain ways, then I don't see why
we can't ultimately understand that in terms of the brain.
For example, the problem is we're at such an early stage.
At the time of Aristotle, if you wanted to understand why water felt wet, you really
didn't have the means.
Somebody could say, we're never going to understand that in physical terms.
Now, any way you can describe the property of wetness, we have an explanation in terms
of quantum mechanics and atoms and hydrogen bonds.
We have explanations of why it has all the properties of wetness.
In Aristotle's time, that was totally out of reach, but it didn't mean it was out of
reach and principle.
I think we're in Aristotle's time in terms of neurosis.
No, just one...
I don't agree actually about the subjective experience, but I actually feel that's a
red herring.
I think as it can shine again pointed out, it's amazing that you decide to move your
arm and it goes up.
It's amazing that you get touched and you feel it.
So I actually think, like Nicholas Humphrey has written, that actually knowing where your
limits in space when you close your eye is probably on the way to subjective conscious
experience and you have a lovely argument of that kind.
What I'm saying is that you keep using the word understand and what I'm saying can is
you remove causal relations from that word.
What does it mean?
It means understanding the substance.
No, don't use understanding to explain understanding.
It means understanding the substructure that leads to the structure.
Leads, but what does needs do?
Is that causality?
It's getting a deeper understanding of how the pieces are put together.
You can't be going back to that word.
What you're saying is what does it mean?
What is causality?
What I'm saying is that in the philosophy of science, in words explain and understand
and cause are not the same thing or predict.
When a sycamore leaf is dropped, we know the physics of the movement of a sycamore.
It's extremely difficult to predict what its trajectory is going to be.
Similarly, you can have converse situations where you can predict but not understand things.
What I'm saying is the problem here is that you're using the word understanding.
When you say, why is that woman crying?
It's because she's sad.
That's an explanation and you go, I now understand why she's crying.
Causality is not in there in the scientific sense.
What I'm saying is understanding isn't synonymous with causality.
As soon as one goes after a scientist, like I'm going after you, to remove any causal sounding
words from your sentences.
Your left bereft.
That's what I'm saying is what's so difficult about this.
To me, it's a matter of these things.
There's very, very complicated structure underlying it.
The more you get insight, it's not a total understanding.
You gain insight, the more you understand the structure underneath the surface.
A body of correlations is not nothing.
I think that's what you mean.
You gain more and more and more correlations.
They aren't causal.
I think perhaps John
has a question.
You can also say that whatever event that this poor woman had in her life before she
started crying had some causal relationship to her crying in a way that we could understand
in some scientific fashion, perhaps though not just in terms of we wouldn't be in the
language of neuroscience.
In the language of psychology or sociology, events in one's life that have an effect
on your emotions.
That's not outside of science, I don't think.
Is it?
No, I'm just saying-
It's just that science is not neuroscience.
Right, I'm just saying that there are, as a general, intentional levels, there are words
that do explain them that mean things.
All I'm saying is that if you want it to sound like an explanation or understanding,
by dropping down to what is doing good, correlational causal work and wanted to also give you,
along with its correlational causal truth, the feeling of explanation and understanding,
in addition when you subtract the way the correlational causality, we don't have a way
of doing that.
No, and I agree entirely.
You could say that in some ways, there's just a dependency relationship between these
levels of explanation.
You can't have one without the other.
We're not going to have crying people who have no brains.
Nevertheless, the explanation that's going to satisfy the question of whether it was
or someone crying is simply not going to be done at some lower level of dependency that
needs to be there, but it doesn't do any explanatory causal work.
It doesn't.
And I don't have to- I don't claim any of the answer.
I'm just saying that I don't think we should fool ourselves with these words and use them.
Well philosophers of science have spent a lot of time arguing about what it means to be
an explanation and to have understanding, and they've come to no answers on this or no
understanding.
But some of them, like Nathan Salmon, he did argue that an explanation is just providing
a cause.
Boss von Frostin, one of my favorite, he says an explanation is an answer to a Y question.
So it's sort of a social thing also when we stop sort of asking the question, maybe we
have the explanation.
Now Ken, I wanted to say you're just really not being bold enough, I would say.
I am another thing that boss von Frostin says that I like to quote quite often.
So he says there are no science stoppers.
And I really believe that.
I mean, well yes, from our perspective now, consciousness, subjective experience that's
beyond the Ken, but you know, why, who knows?
I mean, how can we, at our point, really, I mean, there have been such major turnovers
in science, but we couldn't have predicted at all in the past, maybe in the future, we
will stop, you know, wondering why consciousness, why are we subjective, and it will just be
something that seems, somehow we've come up with some psychologically satisfying answer
to it.
Now, of course, there is the other certain science stoppers do exist in terms of grant
money.
You know, maybe it's not reasonable to be giving a lot of money right now to the neuroscientists
studying subjectivity because we're nowhere close enough.
But in principle, why like sort of say, absolutely not, isn't it useful to leave open, except
for maybe economic reasons?
So, okay, I don't think it's really the most important question to worry about, but the
reason I say that is what science does, I mean, we start with subjective experience
of an objective world.
What science does is it isolates the things that are objectively reproducible, objectively
definable, operationally definable.
And so you can, I believe consciousness, science, consciousness, neuroscience is a real field
because what it has to do with understanding what brain processes and what brain systems
are active, in what ways when you are versus are not conscious, when you do versus don't
consciously perceive something.
It's knowing, you know, ultimately, hopefully we will completely be able to say by observing,
you know, the brain, whether someone was conscious of a certain thing or not.
I think that's totally unreached.
What I don't think is unreached is to say why there's a subjective experience associated
with it because all that science can talk about is the objective processes underlying.
Or how you get from these objective processes to this objective experience, not just why.
I'm impressed that you know what science can do, maybe that's what it can do today.
But come on, look at what Aristotle would have said, all this was what science can do.
He would have really had a much different, none of what we are doing today would have
he said.
But I mean, prediction is difficult, especially about the future.
I think someday you have an explanation that makes us satisfied and stop worrying about
it, you know, so that to say when this subsystem of the brain acts in this way, it makes the
brain imagine that it's experiencing something and that's consciousness.
You know, and you could imagine that we will tell ourselves a story that will satisfy ourselves
and will be 100% correlated with when you're conscious and when you're not.
That's different from saying why dead matter has subjective experience.
That's just that we can get a satisfying explanation, but that's a different issue.
I think it's an important one though.
I think it might seem termological and not that interesting, but what's happened over
time was when neuroscience says that's not a scientific question and subjectivity and
consciousness have gotten that treatment, it ends up flipping over into mysticism and
religion.
Usually there's a great deal of pressure for it to flip over into religion and mysticism.
So I think it's easy to say this is part of the natural world.
We probably need a different way of thinking about science and different technological
kind of advances to be able to master this, but the problems don't go away.
And one of the central problems subjectivity is if you think of it as an epiphenomena,
it's not very interesting.
But if you think of intention and top down regulation as critical to human behavior and
to expand it outward to the ant in a colony, to political life, to life, liberty and the
pursuit of happiness, if you think all of that is critical, then you don't want to walk
away from it as potentially open to reliable and valid knowledge, AKA science.
I don't want to look at any of that.
It's only any objective process you must have to name on.
Intentionality won't make me quite.
Yeah, any objective process you can put a name on, I think we can investigate.
It's just why that objective process is not, you know, look, when a computer program is
complicated as we can make it today, I think we all feel confident does not have any subjective
experience.
A car engine, I think we all feel confident does not have any subjective experience.
So you keep adding more and more and more complexity of the matter, and at some point
the matter has subjective experience.
I think we can talk about all the complexity of the matter, all the processing it does,
we can talk about which of them are associated with subjective experience.
But the fact that the dead meat requires subjective experience, how do you, there isn't a
fact, that's a fact, it's a phenomenon.
Well, I think I recognize that it's a paradox.
How do we have an objective science of subjectivity?
I honestly feel...
It's a real problem.
I mean, there's a lot more that's concerning about understanding the link between mind
and brain than this old sore of subjectivity and consciousness.
I think one of the...
I think one has to distinguish.
It's extremely important to distinguish between making statements about science never getting
somewhere.
I think you're totally right.
And at no point was I trying to say that versus logical conceptual errors that are
being made and being mistaken for lack of scientific progress.
And all I'm saying is they're not the same.
There's a lot of logical conceptual error in the way we think about these questions that
is invariant to how far we are along in terms of our technologies and our techniques.
Of course we don't know.
And actually, when it comes to the subjectivity argument, that's actually what I don't think
it's such a big deal.
I think it's a big deal because of us posing it.
We give special status to subjectivity over pain, over proprioception.
But that's cultural.
I actually think this obsession with consciousness subjectivity is a cultural bias, more than
a difference in kind.
And I just...
I hope this is a complex discussion that understanding things like language, pain, movement, attention,
all of those are difficult to know what the right level of analysis is.
Do we do psychological modules?
Do we do circuits?
Do we do neural?
I'm trying to say that all those areas that aren't the sexy area of consciousness of subjectivity
are all still in play in terms of we're not sure what the level of granularity is to do
the work.
That's what I'm saying.
It's true in all areas, even movement.
And what I'm saying is that the moment in neuroscience we've got this reductionist turn
where we feel like we can play God on small circuits, which we can.
It's remarkable what we can do now on small circuits.
We are like gods, right?
Has led to a kind in my view premature belief that this is going to be extrapolated to be
as good as what our current psychological functional explanations look like.
So you see global points.
Right.
So if I understand what you're saying now, the complaint or the concern about reducing
subjectivity is for you at least less of a concern or is a red herring in the way of
actually what you're really worried about, which is reducing and being kind of a sort
of neurological greediness at other levels of the mind, which aren't even conscious actually.
That's correct.
And what we're really dealing with is how are we going to do neuroscience versus psychology?
One is functional, one is mechanistic.
And that's a genuinely difficult bridging question.
And that's true across the board.
And I think that there's a tendency to believe that we will, even for complex cognitive phenomena,
be able to explain away some of our functional designations with lower level ones.
And at the current time, that has not succeeded.
Now, whether there's some breakthrough, we shall see.
But that's right, but that's so that we're agreeing because as I said, we're, you know,
we're centuries or millennia away from those kinds of connections.
But that's different from saying in principle, it can't be done, which is what I thought
you were saying.
No, I wasn't saying principle.
I was saying I want to distinguish between what is still open to being discovered versus
what is a illogical kind of framework to begin with that needs to just be dismantled a little
bit.
So that's saying one day we'll understand the ether, there is no ether.
Right?
And what I'm saying is we just, I want to say that there are lots of philosophical, logical
mistakes at work today, which by the way, the neurological fallacy that Haka talks about,
Aristotle was the one who first came up with that idea that it's not the idea that the
part is doing what the whole is doing.
Aristotle was the first one to point that out and he's correct up until this day.
Wings don't fly, birds do.
Right?
In some language, yes, sir.
The amygdala does not feel pain.
Right?
Well, yeah, I don't think...
You could say the heart doesn't pump blood, a person does.
No, I think we all feel comfortable saying the heart pumps blood.
You could say, you know, the brain doesn't think the person does.
Well, that's because we identify the person with what the brain does.
So in that sense, we feel more comfortable saying the person thinks.
It's just sensible to say the brain.
Now, the amygdala, you wouldn't feel the pain.
Yeah, but without pain sensors and your periphery, you wouldn't.
So are they feeling pain in your skin?
That's not the question.
No, I'm saying we don't consider your skin as feeling pain.
We don't.
Right?
Or you do when you burn your hand, your skin is moving.
No, it's not your skin feeling pain.
It's not your skin feeling pain.
And then why do you say my skin hurts?
No, because we're very subject to this neurological fallacy, which Aristotle first pointed out.
Yes, right.
There's an importance to that because we start with saying it's my...
I just burnt my finger, my finger is there for hurting.
And out of that observation comes a series of other development and progress that gets
us to the point where you can say, this part, these circuits and this and that got us to
the fact that now I'm perceiving this.
But there's a causal...
There is a... in terms of worrying about subjectivity and the consciousness, there is a gain at
the end, just as there is a gain about understanding any of the...
Interesting facts and causality that we gathered along the way.
What I'm saying is the answers aren't of the form of the original question.
Your five government interests in five governments.
Can't hear you in.
Why is the government interested in...
Well, it's... well, there was a leader, Thomas O'Hil, who was the head of the NIMH and he
had a very narrow view.
I think he would have benefited from a conversation with you about the epistemologic problems of
neuroscience and he felt that we were wasting our time looking for correlations, wasting
our time doing clinical research that didn't have clear biomarkers or neural circuits.
These are the two big terms.
And so he mandated, kind of from the top down, that any grant that would be coming to the
NIMH must make a claim about a biomarker or a neural circuit that was underlying it in
a causal manner.
Now in psychiatry, we have none.
So that puts researchers in a rather strange position.
They have to make something up.
Mr. Ensel, a doctor Ensel, has gone to Google.
We're no doubt he's doing very well.
He left...
He left Google already.
He left the company now.
Okay, but the NIMH to this date, we don't know, they have a new director.
We'll see if they continue with this.
Whether they do or not, it is a really made manifest the way science can become epistemologically
unsound and ideological essentially.
This was essentially ideology.
It wasn't science.
And it's really a hamper research.
The irony was the great victory of Tom Ensel's NIMH came out as he was on his way out the
door.
It was a five-year study that showed that early intervention with young people who were psychotic,
with psychotherapy and family support and medication led to better outcomes.
It was a study that could not have been done with a biomarker or a neural circuit.
So his greatest victory actually seemed to imply that he should not have made these
decisions, but it's presently the law of the land at the NIMH.
As far as I understand.
Maybe I'll say if it's okay.
Okay, I mean I also, in my research, I also, and I'm writing a book really why we need
to move beyond this problem actually of just the subjectivity and consciousness actually.
So mind without matter.
We don't need to be thinking now about that relationship, but I just have to say something
about this, still this idea that there's this insuperable problem about science's objective
and the consciousness is subjective.
Well, you know, no one else, as philosophers, no philosopher has been able to explain what
that means to say science is objective.
It's very difficult to say what that exactly means.
So it's not, it sounds like there's a problem, but it's not clear what that problem is at
all if there is a problem.
So I wouldn't take that as a, okay, we're never going to get there because we have science
as objective and if we don't really know what that means.
I mean, just to defend Ken a little bit about, just so you don't think I'm anti-circuit.
I mean, these are subtle issues.
But if you look at the Sherryton's work on the stretch reflex, in other words, Shankton
at the end of the 19th, early 20th century was very interested in the loop between the
sensation and the reflex, you know, the nature that everyone says.
And we do have a mechanistic understanding that goes beyond correlation or causation.
I mean, when you talk about understanding in science, it's about this object, pushing
on that object and moving it.
It's about interaction between things.
Although not in physics because they don't even talk about causality and physics.
Well, well, I mean, quantum mechanics is a causal to degree, but that's not true at
the meso level they do, right?
So in other words, what I'm saying is, is you can say, and Sherryton did, that this is
a stimulus, it hits the 1A apron, it goes and it makes a monosynaptic connection to the
motor neuron, which then innovates the muscle, and that is really nice.
It's just the kind of work that we like.
And then you look at eye movement, so the very famous engineer at Hopkins called David
Robinson, who beautifully integrated eye movements with the circuitry underlying them in the
brainstem and a mathematical model.
There was an isomorphic click between the model, the anatomy and the behavior.
So there are beautiful successes in neuroscience where you do get the perfect link between
the circuit, the behavior and a computational model.
The problem is, is can we repeat that success when it comes to what we all call the mind
or cognition?
When I mentioned Janelia at the beginning of this session, they say, look, what if we
find the cognitive primitive that is the equivalent of the stretch reflex or an eye movement,
but it's not about the sensory motor, we'll move those out.
It's about that decision in between, right?
That it's the cognitive decision that is invariant to whether you decide to pick up
the apple because you saw it, you smelled it, you can use your mouth, you can use your
hand.
The decision is invariant to the sensory stimulus and to the effector and if we could just understand
the cognitive equivalent of the stretch reflex, we're on our way, right?
And we have the technology now that Sherryton didn't have and David Robinson didn't have,
we can move beyond the sensory motor.
That's what's going on.
And what I'm saying is, is there's a possibility, just like we're seeing with deep mind, we
don't know what all those synaptic weights are doing, but when it gets to cognition of
the form we're interested in, it won't be that cliquey little isomorphic feeling that
eye movements and stretch reflex have.
That's the big dilemma is will we be able to extrapolate, because even for the stretch
reflex, we haven't been able to extrapolate to motor cortex, we still don't know what
motor cortex does and we've had stretch reflex for 100 years.
So I'm just voicing a little bit of skepticism about the simple version and then scaling it
up.
But again, it's, there's a question of in principle, is it impossible or is it, are
we just way premature?
And you know, just as another example, I mean, you know, memory.
So we, that's a psychological process and from neuropsychology, but the neuro was critical.
We've discovered it breaks up into pieces, right?
There's the episodic memory and there's the short term working memory and there's the
short term and long term episodic memory and the ways those that psychology that's neuro
psychology, but we didn't and that's that I love that stuff.
That separates from procedural memory.
And there's not agreement that they don't have agreement about that.
But we never knew any of those things separated until there was a jam, right?
So until there was a guy who lost his ability to make new episodic memories.
Well, that research though is though also I think we can't talk about that research
after you have you read the journalist's book about the research on HM.
I don't think it's, yeah.
That's not going to happen anymore.
Well done.
It was like, no, I mean, you're talking about, you know, the ethics of how it was done.
I'm just talking about the results.
Right.
I mean, we can maybe separate them.
We'll leave them there.
But my point was that a psychological process starts to break up into pieces we were not
aware of that give us insight.
Oh, I love that stuff.
And that's never going to stop.
We're never going to stop breaking it up into pieces that are we didn't know about and
that are going to give us insight into how it works and give us more and more power to
manipulate it.
No, just agreement there.
You know, neuropsychological decomposition into modules is not the same as circuit implementation
in neuroscience.
They're not there.
They're related.
Well, okay.
But that's so a third cause.
All right.
I'm going to turn it on.
Please come to the microphone for asking any questions that you may have.
No, I don't want to worry in principle.
Should there be limits to what we can know?
I'm thinking of evolution.
Obviously, you know, a monkey can't know answer these questions.
And if you think of evolution, our brains have evolved to deal with everyday life.
I'm assuming evolution hasn't stopped.
Something species have come along with brains bigger than ours and can't figure out why
we can't understand things.
So why is it obvious to me that there are questions that we haven't ever answered?
Well, that's a good question.
I mean, I would say we shouldn't take there to be in principle science toppers.
Why?
Say you can't do it.
It's not useful psychologically from a psychological perspective.
Like since we don't know.
We so, yes, of course our brains are a certain size.
We have certain resources.
They're going to be limits.
But why say we can't right now, we're at a point where we can't because in the past
we've seen so many times where scientists have said, oh, we've figured it all out now.
This is something we can never figure out.
And we have after time.
Not these questions.
So the thing that we're just spending your money should do where you think you can have
the most chances of the things.
Yes, so that's why there are practical reasons.
So maybe, you know, this is why maybe it's an argument since some people want the money
and they're trying to argue for it.
So that's a reasonable argument.
But I don't think we can predict the future well enough given how much science has changed
in the past.
It's going to change in the future too.
I think to say this is one area where we're absolutely certain we'll not make progress.
So yes.
I don't think you know what I'm saying.
I think there's another.
No one said that.
Yeah, there's another answer which is that this isn't just about pure science.
It's about pragmatic problems.
You know, as a psychiatrist, if someone comes to me and I take the epistemological standards
that we've been talking about today, I say, I really have no idea.
I have no idea about almost anything at this level of certainty and causal certainty.
And yet, here is a person who needs help.
So I have to try to think in a very dirty way from a scientific point of view about what's
pragmatically and what's pragmatically effective, what kind of correlations exist, what things
like my experience have shown me that give me some sort of dirty attempt to try to help
this person.
So I think that's just one experience.
I think there's a whole array of other pragmatic reasons why saying this isn't unanswerable
leads to, it doesn't have to lead to fake answers.
It can lead to hypotheses that you know are not confirmed that are working in hypotheses
that help you work through a problem.
Well, I would someone study consciousness for instance.
I don't think there's any sort of human knowledge benefit.
And for me, that's obvious one where we're not going to have an answer.
It's really one possible.
Well again, we're going to have lots of answers about what neuroprocesses happen when you
are and aren't conscious.
But so those will have certain kinds of answers.
I think, well, of course.
And also, I mean, why study consciousness?
I mean, there's several, there's different ways in which one can study consciousness.
I mean, since consciousness is actually available for introspection, it is something we all
experience because it is experience.
It certainly is available for all kinds of investigation and explanation of a gist of
a different sort than you might have with respect to its neural substructure.
So then why do it?
Well, because actually it's the world in which we all live.
I mean, it was something that we all care deeply about because it's something we are
intimately familiar with from waking up to going to sleep.
So certain jetties and consciousnesses, if it's irrelevant, seems to basically leave
behind the entire world.
And who would want to do that?
So like, you know, it could be out there with the science of correlations like you were
describing, the whole neural-carlate program, which I think is underway for a while now,
and or it could be some other form of phenomenological science where actually you really look hard
on your own experiences and those are the reports of others.
And also, you don't know what type of spin-offs it might have.
With pure research now, we don't really know what these correlations would do.
You don't know what type of...
And if people are motivated, if there's some people that are interested, well then they'll
probably work really hard and maybe do some good research.
I have a wonderful scientist, MIT, Harvard, Emory Brown, who've done some fascinating
work on the differences between being under anesthesia and versus being asleep, for example,
and being sedated and doing what Ken was talking about.
Very interesting differences in the sub-component neuroanatomy and physiological processes versus
immuno-reuse sleep, sedated, or under anesthesia of different kinds.
It says, wonderful, basic work being done in hospitals where patients are being put under
anesthesia.
In fact, Emory Brown's work to me is some of the nicest work showing how you can do in
parallel mechanistic modular work and work that's going to be important for patients.
The problem with translation, I mean, with a wonderful paper that came out last year by
Unida Senjoyna at how little of what the NIH has funded has translated.
And one of the reasons they put forward is because it's this horrible reductionist neuromolecular
program that we're going to solve disease, one molecule at a time, one gene at a time.
And actually, if you notice now, many people are considerably their sanguine now about
what they think this is going to lead to, the former head of the NIH and Blanchion's name
now, he was interviewed recently about Thomas Insol.
No, I mean, he was saying, you know, we've got hundreds and hundreds of genes associated
with all these things.
We haven't got the slightest clue what to do about it.
Now, when it comes to things like diabetes, hypertension, stroke, heart disease, and,
you know, obesity, cigarette smoking, opioid addiction, you know, these chronic, low-end
lifelong conditions that require behavioral intervention, we're very bad because we want
a delta function, we want a pill or a surgery or a zap.
The idea, and just so you understand the absurdity of it, if I had said to you, take this pill,
sir, swallow it, and you'll be an expert pianist, right?
Take this pill and you don't need to go to college, all four years of college, you've
been compressed into this pill.
You rightly go, there's something nonsensical about that.
But once you get to medicine, switch you being healthy and taking a pill to be an expert,
violinist or pianist, but take this pill and we'll cure your multiple sclerosis, your
Alzheimer's.
That suddenly makes more sense, right?
Right.
So what I'm saying is it's going to turn out that we're going to have to do a lot more
human-behavioral modular work than mass models of Alzheimer's.
I'm not against them.
I do think there'll be pharmacological interventions.
I do mouse studies.
But again, you're totally correct that there is an equivalent fallacy in medicine of a
reductionist kind, just like there is in neuroscience, right?
That we're going to solve diseases, one drug, one molecule, one gene at a time.
And if you look at these papers by Unidists and others, it's been for the most part of
failure.
Now, I'm going to get into lots of trouble saying that, but I'm just quoting them.
Yeah.
Well, the other sort of pie-in-the-sky translational outcome of studying consciousness through neuroscience,
of course, would have to do with end-of-life issues, whether one of patients in a coma.
So you need to, you know, I mean, it's a lot of complicated issues here.
Do we, is this over?
Is there anything worth living for?
You know, is, is, if there is subject to consciousness, does that make life, you know,
so it's a very complicated thing to think about that requires a lot of interdisciplinary
thought.
But that could be, you know, a principle, a possible translational issue.
Hey, this is a question that Sam Harris addresses.
I think in the book, Consciousness, but don't hold me to that.
If we can never understand this subject, or if it's a long way off, you never say never,
either way, pattern, you want to go by, how can we be responsible for our actions?
Well, I'm not sure if I actually see the connection, to be honest.
I mean, I'm, yeah, your question is the perfect question, because it's exactly the perfect
question, because it's exactly the way not to think about these things.
We're talking about a social psychological being, we call the you.
When we talk about, you know, is the brain deterministic, or, you know, where, where does
that choice live, nearly, that's a whole nother level that I don't think we have any good
clear answers.
But it doesn't, it doesn't, I mean, when we talk, it's a practical matter.
We talk about people being responsible, in part, because we're either trying to, you
know, cause interventions to change their behavior, or cause interventions to lock them
away so they don't bother us again, or we're doing things in the human world on the basis
of morality and responsibility.
And the fact that things have physical causes is at a whole completely different level.
And Jonathan, I'm sure, could talk about this far better, I mean, it's more 19th century
than 18th century, but the sort of medicalization of, you know, behavioral states, I mean, you
know, homosexuality, for example, it went from being a legal issue to being the most
medicalized issue.
Everyone had a theory about this, right?
And I'm saying that the equivalent of this medicalization of things that shouldn't be
medicalized, I think in a way, neuroscience is doing the same thing.
It's walking over areas it should not be trespassing on.
I would, okay, I need to say something, because I would say it's not the exact wrong question.
I think there is an issue here.
And I do think as society in courts of law, and it does, sometimes we do take away responsibility
when we find an underlying physical cause.
And I think this is something that it's a very, I mean, I think we're not going to always
say it's just the person we always have free will, but it's a very delicate balance.
And we have to think about it carefully, and just make sure that, I mean, yeah, sometimes
we do take it away.
But it's a mistake.
I don't know if it's always a mistake.
Well, but I mean, you know, it's not always a mistake.
Sometimes it makes sense, I think, to take it away.
It's no different in kind from the question of my responsible, if my childhood experience,
you know, let me down this path.
It's just, it's a difficult question.
And it's a difficult question.
There's, you have to take it to so many issues.
Yeah, it's a similar, we don't have a solution, but one way or the other, it's complicated.
It depends on part of, to go back to Baslan-Drasen's language, like what question you're asking.
So there's a, like, for example, they just, sure, John and Ken read the article today,
or yesterday's times, about the brain of the shooter in Las Vegas.
Yeah, I see.
They sliced it, diced it, looked at it.
Interesting.
You know, and they came up with it.
No, we can't tell anything that's different about this brain, that would explain it.
But I know it's, but even if they had, but my point in the end, I think it's a little
bit of a, my point is both to kind of yet another example of neuromania, but also, but
also because, because if you think about what they were asking, it was not if we actually
found some sort of underlying, you know, abnormality that would explain the recent, you know,
that would explain the atrocity that we then therefore excuse him for it in retrospect.
It's more like, would this provide an account of the, you know, the change in behavior that
led up to an atrocity that he would have he had survived, still be put in jail for?
I think that's a reasonable question.
That's a, it's a question different, however, from a legal question.
And I think sometimes they often get confused.
And I think that, then especially when you bring in something as, you know, as difficult
as free will talk, it then just becomes a mess.
Yeah.
And we would love to keep them separate.
It's much easier to say the moral, political, social world is dominated by notions of free
will.
We need to operate that way.
If we work at the level of biological determinism, that doesn't really correspond to that.
And so we'll, this will go over here and that'll go over there.
But then if you want to think of a field, forensic psychiatry is when the two mix.
And you know, the, someone is going to be making decisions about whether someone had
intentionality and free will and, and civilized society since the 17th century have said,
you know, if you're start raving mad and you commit a crime, that's going to be different
than otherwise.
You know, I think embarrassingly some of these studies are like, I mean, these people go
to eat a Chinese restaurants too much.
They think you open the brain, it's going to be like a fortune cookie and insights.
I wanted to kill a lot of people, but they never find anything like that.
And just to get to the notion of explanation so you can get some sense, you know, Fred
is a teatotler.
Why?
His father was an alcoholic.
Ah, yes.
Do you see what I'm saying?
Yeah.
We can create these pseudo explanations right at any level, right?
And it's very tempting.
We live by them.
And what I'm, and what I'm saying is, as I think I, and the demonstrate, they're not,
right?
But we, we like them.
And we now have a new kind of nonsensical explanation like that, which is neuromania,
right?
We like to have this new addition to these pseudo explanations that as you say, we live
by.
You know, from, at least from the literary sort of history of science and philosophy perspective
that I would have.
I don't think I said anything like consciousness is in the brain.
I think I would just, you know, would say that consciousness requires, for our species,
requires a brain, but is embodied and is about, you know, interacting with the world.
And in other kinds of creatures like, you know, the famous octopus, for example, it's
a much more of a whole body phenomenon.
And arguably is out there in the world too, if you take the kind of panpsychists take
on the, on the heart problem, which I think is very attractive and interesting.
So why not?
I mean, you know, but as I look at this far as I understand it, I think professional
it's taken saying that I just find it, something kind of cool about it.
So, so yeah, so I, you know, at least for us, it's like it requires the brain.
That's all I would say.
But I'm sure these folks who disagree.
I mean, brain is a particular organization of neurons and the nervous system.
It's limo type of nervous system too, that, you know, and plants have certain kinds of
memory and they have it through physical processes in their cells that, you know, don't correspond
to neurons, but it's their own system.
So there's lots of ways of building memories out of, out of cells and ours gets organized
into brains.
And embodiment is one of those very slippery, very cool subjects right now.
I mean, Andy Klartz written famously about this, but I think one way to think about it
is Dennis Noble talks about top-down causality when it comes to the heartbeat.
So you can take a cardiac cell and it will start beating in the right medium.
And then you say, what's the cause of the heartbeat?
Now you can look at the ion channels in that myocardial cell and go, oh, look, those ion
channels, it's through the flow of ions through those channels that needs to a change in the
membrane of the heart cell.
But then you have to go, well, if those ion channels were just floating around alone,
there'd be no heartbeat.
They have to be embedded in a heart cell.
So then where do you point to the heartbeat?
What's the cause of the heartbeat?
The whole thing is the heartbeat.
There is no thing that you can point at, which is more fundamental of the heartbeat.
You need the whole thing, right?
And that's what embodiment is.
Is that you can't avoid being trans-level when you talk about the heartbeat.
The membrane is not doing it alone, the ion channels are not doing it alone, the ions
aren't doing it alone.
It's the whole thing.
So that's really what embodiment is, is that you need the whole thing in its organizational
structure to do the thing that you're seeing in its totality, right?
And that's, I think, the reasonable way of thinking about embodiment is ended up having
a sort of hokey, slightly holistic thing that's attached to it, but that's separate.
Okay.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
