 Hi, I'm Edward Narcissian. I'm the director of the Center. Before we get on with today's program, I'd like to announce the next program which is on April 22nd. And the subject, the title of that program is Design in Nature. It is inspired by a quote from Leonardo da Vinci who said that though human ingenuity may make various inventions, it will never devise any inventions more beautiful, nor more simple, nor more to the purpose than nature does. Because in her inventions, nothing is wanting and nothing is superfluous. Our round table is called Design in Nature. And Andre Bajan, who is a professor who has invented modern thermodynamics and the construction law of design and evolution in nature. Robin Collins, who is a philosopher. Caleb Scharf, who's been with us before, who's a cosmologist. And Mark Norell, who is a paleontologist, and at the museum. So about today, music to whose ears, music and healing, this is the third one in the series, Music to whose ears, and it's called Music and Healing. It was suggested to us by Marina Korsakova Krine, who is a professional pianist and scholar in music, perception and cognition. As I call your name, please indicate who you are. Evalina Fedorenko is assistant professor and director of the X Lab at Harvard Medical School Mass General Hospital. Andrea Norton is senior research associate, Beth Israel, the economist medical center. Andrew Rossetti, clinical music psychotherapist, research mount sign, I bet Israel medical center. John Schafer, host and producer, new sounds on WNYC and Concheta Tomeno, executive director and co-founder Institute for Music and Neurologic Function. Thank you. Well, who's getting us started? Marina? I think we should start the round table with questions to practitioners. To people who practice music therapy, and you have two practitioners, actually three practitioners. Andrea Norton, she does amazing studies with people who suffer a phasor due to stroke. She practices music neurologic therapy and helps people to restore their speech. And Concheta Tomeno, she works with elderly people. She's an amazing researcher and thinker. I have tremendous respect to her writings and her conversations. And Mr. Rossetti, he works at the Mount Sinai Hospital with various patients, including Primus. So he has important experience to share with us. 21 started with the healing part. Yes. Okay. In my work, I've been in the field of music therapy as a professional music therapist since the late 70s. And was introduced to the power of music to affect people, especially in recovery of function, or at least maintenance of function for people with neurologic diseases. And it was obvious back then that there was something about music the way music could arise and stimulate function and people who seemed to have lost function in such a way that I really felt needed to be studied. And we know most people know how much music can help them individually. And what we've been interested in as therapists is how can music be used specifically to really help people not only maintain function, but to bring it back if they've lost it. So people who've had strokes and can't speak or people who have Parkinson's disease and can't walk. But they can do these things specifically with music because of the way the patterns of sound, aroused and stimulate specific areas in the brain into function where that person can't draw upon that by themselves. That's really been the impetus for my work for the past almost 40 years. And Connie, when you started, it really wasn't much. Not in the near-neck. The field of music therapy was established in the United States in the 1950s as a profession, as an academic training program. I started actually initially working with seniors in the nursing home within stage dementia. But my background before that was as a pre-med biology student. So although I was trained at NYU and most of my training was in psychotherapy and the psychotherapeutic aspects of music therapy, when I saw people who supposedly weren't able to recognize anything in the world around them, people with end stage dementia, respond to a familiar song, I had asked the question, how does that happen? How does somebody who has no cognition or cognition that can't be measured by any other means recognize sound in the environment as music? How does their brain recognize that melody as an old familiar song? So that was 1978. And it was in 1980 that I happened to come to Bedebrim or all of his sex was working. And so for the past, up until his passing, we worked together trying to ask those questions. What is it about music that reaches us and helps us maintain function as much as possible? It is probably, I know we've talked about this before, and for Andrea as well, it has to be targeted to the individual. You can't just say music. And I think Bach is great music. But if I play it for you and you have no reason to respond to it, you won't respond. Right. Well, there's some universals in the sense that auditory timing can be purely stimulated. The motor response to rhythm can be purely produced by an auditory signal of a certain beat. Most of us perceive rhythm the same way no matter which country we're from or how we've developed, some have developed more sensitivity to rhythm and complex beats depending on their culture. But when it comes to actual music, melody and song, there's really no universal because how we all experience that music in our lifetime then changes our emotional response and our associations to that. So from the point of birth, or even before birth, because there's musical, some kind of rhythmic perception in utero, we start developing these very strong associations to music from the first time, first breath we take. And those then get encoded in neurologic responses that we can either call upon or whatever. But that's what really makes music unique to us in our own special way based on our life experience and associations. Can I follow up on this? I know very little about music therapy. I'm more on the basic, yeah, science side. So given this point about huge variability across people and what kind of things might drive them or get them around or housed or harmed. So how does it work in practice? So is it a kind of therapy where a patient plays a more active role so that they share information with you guys? Or is there like some period where you're trying to find out what it is that the patient might be most responsive to? Like how would a, if I come to you with a particular problem, how would the whole process of therapy work? So every patient that I work with that mostly in oncology, excuse me. The first thing we do is an assessment. And an assessment of course has to do with medical aspects, also has to do with psychosocial aspects, cultural aspects, we're looking for trauma, things like what might be a person's song of kin, significant music. What it seems that what the research is pointing towards is that what might be most effective, and I really don't think this is rocket science, is that it needs to be music that people like. So the I will be more effective in reaching clinical goals. It depends on what population you're working with in music therapy. For myself that means working mostly with cancer patients. And it also depends on what the goal, Andrew's right, and what the goals are. For people who are working psychotherapeutically, they could be a very active interaction with the client because you want to draw out some of the inhibitions, the hidden responses, and so how they play music maybe feels something about what they're going through. I work a lot with people with neurologic impairment. And in that case, it's actually knowing some of the structures of music and how music affects the brain. And that could be very prescriptive at times. Whereas a certain rhythm can drive motor function and somebody with Parkinson's disease, it doesn't matter whether they like the rhythm or not, it's going to cause this kind of motor entrainment. And the same thing with somebody who has a speech problem or aphasia being able to use the melodic contour of sound and the rhythmic structure of speech and music helps them therapeutically if that's used in a very directed way. So the field of music therapy is quite broad, depending on the background and the training, just like medicine. You know the field of medicine is as broad as the practitioner and the training. And so the field of music therapy is there broad as well. Is there like a clear ontology of the kinds of things that they do? Is there like a clear set of programs or is it just really heterogeneous? No, there's a standard of practice by the American Music Therapy Association that talks about the different populations and the range of training within those populations. So somebody's working psychotherapeutically and maybe analytical music therapy and maybe another type of music therapy. If somebody's working with people with neurologic diseases, it may be neurologic music therapy which is more prescriptive. And then there's more humanistic approaches too that's dynamic. And some therapy is very passive. It could be as simple as programming like music to help somebody relax but it's done with the music therapist's analysis and carry over their work. That's a good point. So I'm going to pick that up there. The thing about what sometimes it's called receptive music therapy or passive listening, things like that. That's sort of the lowest common denominator. But even so, there are situations where we cannot use live music which is what I think most people would agree seems to be most effective. So using prerecorded music is an option. For instance, in radiation oncology, there isn't a way for me to provide live music therapy during treatment. But I can prescribe music for patients to listen to. So the first thing would be an assessment of what the patients' needs are. So let's say you have someone who's very anxious. Well, first they would identify the type of music that they like to listen to. And then we would take music and music that they've identified and analyze it and then place it in a sequence to obtain a sedation effect. What are any effects are you aiming for as a sedation? I mean you talk about therapy. What are the symptoms if you will that you're tackling? That's a huge question. It is. So a good example, and Andrew, you could speak to it too, somebody who has a stroke for example and loses their speech. There's still the potential of that person recovering some form of communication by stimulating other networks in the brain that are still intact that still help with word retrieval and the prosody of speech but they're dominant in music-scented areas. So music is processed throughout the brain. It's not just a right left situation like the thought of in the past. Somebody who loses the ability to find words may have damage in the specific area in the left part of the brain but they still have the ability to use those words if it's in a certain structure and that structure tends to be musical in nature because that part of the brain is still intact. And so people like Andrea who do melodic intonation therapy treatments are using those structures in the musical way to help recover speech. So what we do is quite different from music therapy in that we're using music as an intervention in a clinical trial so everybody gets exactly the same intervention. And the people that we work with have had severe strokes. Many of them have lost as much as the entire left hemisphere of their brain and what's fascinating what fascinated me because I don't have a medical background or a music therapy background. I'm a choral musician and conductor and singer myself but came to this through music education research and seeing how music affected children's learning and then made this leap to clinical research with music. And the people that have these strokes that are so massive if you ask them to speak the words of happy birthday they can't do it. They can't get anything out at all. And if you ask them to sing the song you wouldn't know they'd had a stroke. It's a preserved function in their brain that melody. So melodic intonation therapy actually capitalizes on that preserved brain tissue. And so what we're looking at in a neuro imaging study and with behavioral testing before, during and after therapy is how does music change the brain over the course of treatment. So the people that we work with are people who are chronic patients. They've had a stroke at least a year ago. They've had lots of regular speech therapy but not music therapy and we find that they make huge improvements over the course of treatment. Now the treatment that we're able to give in this research setting is much more intensive than anybody's insurance will pay for. So it's really a luxury on our end that we get to see this progression of no speech at all to whatever people end up with in the end. And not surprisingly what people put into it is often what they get out of it. And those who practice more and use it more do better over time but there are all sorts of other factors that we see anecdotally things like family support and positive attitude that adds to this music effect. So I think there are more studies to be done afterward that will tease this out but it's fascinating to watch people be able to take this simple treatment which is no more than singing what you would speak. It's not about singing a song or listening to a song or what's your favorite music. It's about what do you want to say. So if I want to say hello nice to meet you. I'm so happy to be here today. You use the same basic pros that speech would have any syllable that would be accented in speech gets the higher note anything that's not accented gets the lower note so anybody can pick it up and it's a treatment that you can over time learn to do yourself. So I can say more about that but that's just one that's one small piece. Those of us who work with patients who have chronic pain there's some good scientific research that shows how there's a top down gating of the perception of pain if somebody's listening to music. There's also Isabelle Parrot's at Montreal is doing some research on that so we can gate the perception of pain if somebody's listening to pleasurable music. We can help with early childhood development for children to develop language. Children with autism doing some work with that too in the lab. Children who are pre-linguistic can learn the structures of communication through music even though they can't conceptualize what words are yet. So an idea of a happy sound or a sad sound they can start acquiring the building blocks of emotional language even though their brain can put together what words are. So all that comes through music. I mean it's one of the reasons why music is such a... We talk about it as a powerful tool. I don't mean that casually but it really is because it touches so much of it and a lot of it is neurologically based how our brains perceive sound and how we organize that perception. You know there's this old saying of music is the universal language which to me as always seemed like well speech is a universal language as well doesn't mean that just because I can speak I can understand somebody from Mongolia. You know there are different languages within speech and it seems like it's the same thing with music but do you know Tom Fritz at the Max Planck Institute in his studies with the MAFA people where he went into the Highlands of Cameroon to a group of people who had really no contact with Western culture, Western music and just showed them three pictures. A happy face, a sad face and a scared face and then played them music and found that the MAFA people who had never heard this music had never heard anything except their own regional folkloric music were consistently able to identify the happy pieces as happy, the sad pieces as sad, the scary pieces as scary by pointing at the appropriate face in front of them. He then took their music back to Germany and did the same test there and Germans who had never heard this music were able to consistently point to the happy face because it turned out all MAFA music is happy. It's just the way it worked. So I mean it seems like there's some kind of universality to music. I'm not ready to say it's a universal language but there are some kind of elements of it that seem to be. The idea that the rhythm of music is related to how we move. So a song that would sound depressing or melancholic would be very slow and tempo because when we're sad we move slowly. If it's very laborious in the way we move. If you're very happy, if you would play something very upbeat and fast rhythmically, the person might say that music is very happy. And so a lot of our music is related to how we as humans move and relate to the world. So that could be universal. But because some of us humans are also musicians and creative types and like to subvert expectations, you have things like Calypso which went Calypso formed as bouncy happy music and the message it was delivering was overthrow the white man, get him off our island, you know, resurrection, revolution, insurrection. You know, that was the message of that was being delivered in this very kind of jaunty, carefree music. So that's how they got away with it. A couple of different things going on here. I think what we were talking about before about associations, associative processes with music. All music creates associations. We could argue that music is metaphoric in nature. So I think part of what we're looking at is why I think that music is likely more culturally dependent than not is because we have our own set of cultural metaphors for things that might differ. So associative processes and metaphoric processes, why me have your last, your last statement because I lost my thread of thought here. About the reggae. I mean, about the Calypso. Oh yeah, yeah, just the tension between the message and the kind of the music that was delivering it. Right. So the multiple layers of... Thanks for doing that. So the other thing that I think comes up is how when we listen to music and we're looking at the emotional content of music, there are two different processes going on. One is how we perceive the music to be and the others are our response to it. So I can listen to a very sad piece of music and feel strangely uplifted. Right. Right. So perceived versus how we identify it. Sure. I think it's related to the fact that music is dealing with aesthetic emotions. They're just for basic emotions according to last classification. But aesthetic emotions, it's such a complex thing. And it just happens that music is able to talk, to deliver information that no other means of communication are able to deliver the same certainty and precision. And it's not my thought, it's the thought by Susan Langer, a wonderful American philosopher. So she compared linguistic language with music. And she wrote that music is more precise. Basically, it was your thought. And another very important idea about music, that music delivers, gives us the logic of emotion. When we follow the flow of music, we recreate intuitively emotion inside us, we live another life when we listen to music. And it's life we're abstract. It's very precise and same time we're abstract because there is no objects. There is no such precision as for example language has. We can take any language and translate to other languages. There is nothing to translate in music, as you can do it with pictures. But still music is so sufficient language. There is no cats, hats, houses. It's something that goes directly to our system. But how it goes directly, we still don't understand. Perhaps some understanding of the very fundamental things in music. And it's fun to learn them. Because at least there are some tangibles. But on the top of that, why music makes us cry? Why we have goosebumps? How music delivers important ideas? Philosophical ideas sometimes. We still don't understand that. But this is the most exciting thing about music. How it happens? Do you think it's different whether it's instrumental music or music with words? Because once you do add language to music, now you've really muddied the waters at that point. But it's not just music, it's already words. And as my friend told, sometimes better not to understand words for some songs. It's so beautiful. I would challenge the claim that music is more precise. I would challenge any musician to be able to express something like my husband thinks it's raining. There's a very limited set of messages that we can convey through music. And it's arguable how broad that range is. But certainly it's not the kind of rich communication system that we have through language which makes our species stand out for many other species in terms of the richness of meanings and the arbitrariness of meanings we can convey. So I think the precision scale is maybe not the right end to put language and music on, but rather the kinds of information that they convey. Absolutely agree. Because linguistic language, we have cognitive constants. The certainty, this absolute precision of delivering information in the words. Of course music has different precision and delivers just the most difficult things who we are. Our psychological states, our feelings that they difficult to express in words. So that's who. I mean, I don't know. That's a hypothesis, right? I mean, some people find it quite easy to express their feelings and words. I mean, I think that's that varies hugely across the world. We've seen many, perhaps too many examples of people who use words in very precise ways and are still misunderstood. Oh, that's really true. That's certainly true. And there are musicians like Meredith Monk, the great American composer and vocalist who, despite being a singer, almost never uses words because she feels like music can be very precise in getting to emotions that are, if you think of emotions not as little discrete packets of fear and joy and sorrow or whatever, but as a spectrum, as a continuum, that music can get to those gray areas that we feel emotionally that we don't have names for. The Brazilians talk about saldage. We don't really have a good American word for that. And nostalgia doesn't really come close. But Brazilians know it when they feel. We know it when we feel. We just don't have an English word for it. And music can kind of emotionally target those kind of areas that should... Sure. But music is certainly not the only thing, right? I mean, so so language is the system that we use to exchange thoughts with one another. I mean, that is our primary means of communication. But sure, you can express yourself through painting. You're going to express yourself through dance, through music. And one thing that I've been very interested in whenever I've thought about all of these strands of words that use music therapy is one, what aspects of music are driving? What are the shared mechanisms that, for example, help you either recover speech or become less depressed or tolerate pain better? And also how specific... And it's a related question. How specific is it to music? Right? And so given that... Because understanding how specific effects are is kind of key to understanding what the shared mechanisms might be. And some people have tried to kind of take different components of music therapy apart by, for example, controlling with conditions like, you know, theater therapy, right? Where you also engage with other people, you find some alternative ways of maybe expressing yourself through body language or facial expressions or something like that. So that's trying to, you know, control for one aspect of it. But it sounds like the kinds of music therapy that people use are so, so rich and there are just so many things that go into that big bag. And for people who want to just help other people, they may not care about taking it apart. They just want something that will make someone better at, you know, whatever their problems are. But it seems like ultimately would be really helpful to understand what drives these recovery effects so we can then maybe capitalize on the things that work really well or whatever components are most efficient. Sure. Well, yeah, you've bought up so many really interesting points to talk about. On a mechanistic level, that's still a huge gray area. What you're saying about the difficulties of research in music therapy, that's just a reality. I mean, it's impossible to do a double blind with music therapy. You've bought up a point about specific mechanisms for clinical practice. And Connie started talking about pain. I think we could talk a little bit about that. We started mentioning gating and things like that. So what Connie was, I think what she was starting to talk about, is Milzak and Katz, gay control neurometrics theories. And so following that, there are areas of the pain response. It is a multidimensional subjective response that has different domains. Some of those domains are things that we can work with as therapists with the idea, for example, there is an emotional content always to physical pain. I'm not talking about emotional pain and suffering. So emotion is something that the music is made of, we could argue. So using music to modulate an emotional response to pain is something that is very effective and relatively easy to do. There are other domains. There's a cognitive discriminative domain to it as well. We can use music in a process with that as well. I don't, because it's impossible for everybody is somebody is going to know that music is happening. Does everybody know here what double blind studies are? I mean, I just know people's background. Would you explain it? Yeah. Well, I mean, it's just basically when neither the therapist nor the patient is aware of which treatment group they're in. So there's no biases on the side of the patient or on the side of the... Right. So it's impossible not to know. Somebody knows that somebody's getting music. Yeah. Right. But it seems like I don't know, again, I'm sorry, I don't... So if you had a group who had pain or were going for the same procedure and then get music, and another group who got music, and then we found out which ones had felt less pain, and was in the double blind? No. Because they know what they got. Yeah. There's been studies with both groups get headphones and one might get white noise, and the other one will get some music, and then you could do really a double blind study in that kind of situation. Still say the patient knows. The patient knows. But then that's what we're going to hear. Yeah. Yeah. So we do a double blind study where we're doing non-invasive brain stimulation in conjunction with melodic intonation therapy. And the TDCS or transcranial direct current stimulation unit that we use, the very small thing, which is actually on a wire, which is behind the patient's back and being controlled by another researcher. So you can give one of two kinds of stimulation or you can give sham stimulation so that the patient doesn't know whether or not they feel the same kind of ramp up as the current is turned on in the sham stimulation as they do in either of the other current modes. And I, as the person doing the melodic intonation therapy with them, am unaware of what they're getting. So that is a double blind study. It's not double blind with the music part of it. But we do, just to answer your question from earlier, our study is looking at a specific control intervention that we designed to take the music part away. Everything else is the same. So we have melodic intonation therapy and speech repetition therapy. So the stimuli are exactly the same. The way it's administered is the same except for the singing and the hand tapping, which engage that same. So even another part to further talk about studying researching music, I think one of the challenges is that when we talk about the dynamics, interpersonal dynamics of music therapy, that's hard to study because it's real time interactive music making. But a lot of the research that's been done has been on the components of music, of rhythm and sound and arousal mechanisms. And those can be studied on a neuroscience basis because they can be isolated. But then you have to realize that music is so broad. So we have the sound, we have vibration that can have an impact on function. But once it gets into song, song not, song meaning music, composed music, once it gets into an organized musical sound, then we get into a different hierarchy of processing that becomes more difficult to study, I think. So when you do rhythmic entrainment for someone, say, with Parkinson's, could that person just be using a click track? Yeah. So when the first studies were done, it was by a rhythmic sort of metronomic type click track. And that works fine. What we did find out though is that if the person can, if there's a melody that they can hold on to, so if that melody has a rhythmic pattern to it, they can self-intrain. Because that part of the brain of imaging, imagining that sound could also drive the same mode of mechanism. Interesting. Because in Indian classical music, the- The top of the play is- The top of the play. Yeah, they do that. Yep. They have, you know, they can go and do their own solo performances for an hour or so. But usually there's a very simple repeating- Happened, that keeps it together. A melody played by another instrument. And that instrument is simply accompanying. You know, the melody is just there to kind of keep the ear where it's supposed to be, you know, focused on them. And it's the rhythm that takes you some place. One of the interesting things I think about music, at least when we study it in patients who've lost cognitive function, is that the components of music are processed at sub-cortical levels. So when you look at the piece of art, when you listen to language, that's all high-acortical processing. Not all? Not all. Okay. Sub-cortical contributions as well to some of us. Yeah, yeah. But, well, maybe then maybe I'm wrong. But that this component of our motor system and physiological system that can be driven purely by patterns of sound. So even if somebody has severe cortical damage, there's still ways of entraining them to sound, that is impossible, poo-verbal interaction. And so many times we'll work with people with severe brain injury to sort of jump-start areas of the brain that still may be available to them and bring it into a higher level of action. But tell me about what you were- Well, I mean, I mean, it's, I was just saying that there's sub-cortical contributions to three months now to many, many high-level cognitive functions. But I think also one thing to keep in mind when- so when you were talking earlier, you said that music kind of engages the whole brain. And in some ways, it's certainly true because, you know, if you're a musician listening to music, you're going to activate your motor cortex to some extent, right? Because you're thinking about actually playing that piece. And of course, there's huge swaths of auditory cortex that are active. And then musical is all sorts of emotions. And so the emotional centers are active. And there may be some kind of, you know, thoughts that get generated by music, like, you know, thinking about your loved ones and so your social system may be active and so on. But I think it's really important to also keep in mind- so I'm coming back to this question of specificity- there are some parts of our brain that appear to be really, really specifically responding to music. Okay, so there are some parts of the auditory cortex that respond very, very robustly when we process music and all kinds of music, including familiar and familiar, different cultural, music from different cultures. But these same regions don't respond at all when we hear speech, when we hear animal noises, when we hear all sorts of mechanical noises. So it's a really, really, really specific response. And there's nearby regions, of course, that respond to speech, speech sounds. And those regions are- this is before we get into the language domain. These just respond to the acoustics of speech. They respond just as much to foreign speech as they do to familiar speech. Anyway, so these are the kinds of regions that when damaged will lead to problems which are specific to music. So you mentioned Isabelle Pirez as one of the kind of leaders in that field who has documented very interesting cases of patients who appear to have really quite selective deficits with some aspects of music following stroke. Now, you may have damage to some aspects of your motor cortex or emotional system and may lose some ability to either enjoy some aspects of music or process some aspects of music. But it's really these parts of the auditory cortex that are music selective that seem to be- have this one-to-one relationship with musical abilities and ability to perceive music. That said, I think the place where a music very useful interacts with the rest of the brain is through this very extensive bilateral system which people call many, many names in the literature which is never helpful. But you know, it's- the network is known as task positive network because it gets engaged in many, many tasks where the cognitive control network or the executive system network or the attention network. The bottom line is it's a system that gets engaged in a broad, broad range of goal-directed behaviors. It seems to care about prediction in general. So we predict the world all the time. We try to predict, you know, what happens, what you're going to say next or how you're going to move next, where if I'm listening to a piece of music, you know, what kind of structure might come up, come next and so on and so forth. And that system has been linked to things like fluid intelligence, flexible behaviors, kind of another real hallmark of our species. Monkeys have like an equivalent system. It's just not quite as good. Some people argue it's qualitatively different in some ways, but the evidence for that is a little scan. But anyways, so we have this huge, huge system that allows us to engage in all sorts of goal-directed behaviors and planning. And that's a system that gets engaged very robustly by music and rhythmic stimuli. And it seems like that's where it may actually intersect with things like some aspects of language or some aspects of, you know, motor function or some aspects of kind of general emotion attention components. But there's another kind of sort of crossover, a kind of a gray area between speech and language and Andrea working with people with aphasia. I mean, it's always struck me that people who grow up speaking tonal languages like Mandarin, that line, that differentiation that we make between speech and song is less clear when your language, when every word in your language can have three different meanings depending on whether it's pitched high, medium or low. So it's not quite at the level of language though still. It's at the level of speech perception. So there's indeed very interesting words suggesting, for example, that tone deafness is a lot less common in Mandarin speakers, for example. And again, there's work suggesting that in the auditory cortex, there is some shared bit that responds to pitch across domains. So there it doesn't matter if it comes from a, you know, train horn or music or speech, but it's this very, very sensitive to pitch modulation region. And that's potentially where some of these interactions may happen along with potentially brain stem areas which also have been implicated. But that's again kind of before you get into the realm of mapping thoughts onto linguistic forms which is kind of what the kind of high level language is, right? It's once you're passed with the acoustic signal. And at that level, it seems like there is really, really very clear separation between the regions that support language and the regions that support music, modulo this very, very domain general system, the frontopridal system. I mentioned where every kind of engaging task will overlap. But in terms of the processing mechanism we use for language and music, those appear to be quite distinct. And there's been a lot of confusion in the literature because many people have argued that there is something like an abstract hierarchical processor of structure in language and music. And some people have also added math into the same bag. But the evidence for those kinds of claims all came from studies where the paradigms would be something like you're listening to a piece of music and then you have something that doesn't fit with the preceding context, right? Like violating exactly. Exactly. And so similarly in language you would get a sentence and then something will disagree in gender or number or whatever language you're using, though, basically a grammatical error, right? And as you can imagine, when you're processing a familiar stimulus and you get something that doesn't fit with the context, a lot of things happen in your brain. You're like, wow, you know, this is an error. Something is wrong. I'm going to try to fix it. Did they mean this, right? And so some of the work that we've done has shown that this kind of overlap, it does happen, but it doesn't happen in some abstract hierarchical processor. It happens in this very domain general system that just reacts to basically unexpected events in the world and it will respond just as much to, you know, a sequence of blue circles and then a red circle as a would to a violation of hierarchical structure in music or grammatical structure in language. I just want to follow an arena that language is to my understanding. This kind of intellectual endeavor, while in music, we don't invest intellectual efforts to receive music. This is why it's available to people with Alzheimer, to autistic children, to people with tremendous cognitive problems. We are dealing with a very special way of communication and this special way is to explain the power of music therapy, basically, because as Kanchata wrote, that music is dealing with different pathways to accessing our memories or whatever. It's like, let's say that music gives something like temporary winter, winter of sanity to people with Alzheimer, but they suddenly recognize their relatives. They could not recognize for months already. Or they suddenly have these flashes from their memory or they suddenly start citing the words of the songs in their youth. We are dealing with very special phenomenon which is very accessible. Yes, it's auditory information, of course, and it goes through all the processing delays. And we know there's some difference, like in the sense of brain hemisphere, more responsible for speech and more for music. There's a lot of shared mechanisms, but altogether, in music, we are dealing with a very simple way of encoding complex information and decoding complex information. And this simplicity explains this kind of generosity of communication through music. You don't need to have special training to get very complex messages of music. This is my point. So, we are still training to get messages from language either. In fact, people with severe mental disability, like some individuals with Down syndrome, who would score very poorly on a lot of IQ tasks, they never the last can understand language and produce language. But they need to learn words. Of course, you need to learn words. Dogs can learn. Of course, you need to learn words to communicate with it. It's interesting, some of our patients who had severe phasor, we forget how much our facial expression informs communication. And so, you'll see people who stop mimicking the lip movements of somebody if they're trying to understand what's being said. So, I think as a language species, we tend to really depend on verbal communication to understand each other. But when we lose the ability to express ourselves verbally, we get creative. We get creative. And there's a lot of nuance that we use both through movement, through facial expression, even through, you know, visceral exchanges and feelings and gut responses that are part of communication and the way of sharing. And I think music informs some of that. I think that's why people who have severe brain damage can still appreciate and respond emotionally because some of those contextual elements can be accessed in lower parts of the brain. The other thing, sorry, the other thing that's interesting is when somebody, you were talking about the executive functioning and being able to plan ahead, but some of the work that Charles Lim is doing now in improvisation talks about when somebody's in this super-creative process, the frontal part of their brain isn't as active. They're not self-monitoring anymore. And I think what happens in a lot of our music therapy sessions where we have improvisational of music making, people who can't plan because they've had a trauma, you know, that affects the frontal cortex or can't think through steps of doing things. In the moment of play and spontaneous interaction, they are able to access function because this part of the brain isn't needed anymore. They're working on some other aspects. So there's so much going. There's a few opposing systems. Exactly, yeah. The executive system has kind of its arch enemy, which is the system which people kind of say is aimed at kind of introspecting and recalling things and thinking about others' minds. And it's kind of known as the default mode. Some people link it to social functions so they would talk about the system as a social function because a lot of what we do when we are not actively pursuing a task is think about other people because we're a very social species. And anyway, so how those two systems trade off in complex cognition is a very interesting question. And the interplay between the two systems has been implicated in a lot of psychiatric disorders, actually the various disbalances. It's interesting to think of complex music making where that prefrontal area is kind of needs to step out of the way. That's right to make it. There's a musical technique called hockeying, which is you hear it in some of the music of Duke Ellington, you hear it in Indonesian, Gamelan music, you hear it in the music of Steve Reich, where nobody plays the whole melody. You play the first note, I play the second, you play the third, then you play the fourth, I play the fifth, you play the sixth. And I've asked many musicians who employ this technique what it's like to do it. And universally, the answer is you just stop. You stop thinking and you just, and after a while you don't remember who's doing what, it's just, it becomes its own sort of closed system. And of course it takes training. You have to internalize the individual parts, but the idea is to get to that point where the front of the brain shuts down and you just go on instinct. I think it's really important to concentrate on your thing, thought that we have language, we are dealing with high processing basically. Yeah, there are some other layers, but still it's high processing. What about music? Well, there's higher processing in music. I mean musicians do it all the time where we listen, we process with the sounders, with the key is, with instruments of playing, with the harmonic structures. So that's very high. And in fact the more exposed we are to music, the more we're able to appreciate complex music. Whereas a novice musician may find some abstract music very disconcerting. Whereas an expert musician might see the excitement in, you know, stock housing or something. But I don't think that the expertise and so and so important. Because people basically don't need to learn language. I mean we could use five or six words to pretty much get around. It's not true. I mean, no, no, I'm saying that there's some universal. There's certain basic things that we get out of music and we get out of language that we could survive with. That's right. But to really be creative and spontaneous and be able to engage at a higher level, we need all those other elements available to us. I'm rooting for something different. You see, music therapy can help premise. It can help artistic children. And sometimes the artistic children can be kind of very much on the limits of spectrum, like non-negristic kids. It can help people with various cognitive problems like Parkinson's when it's already cognitive problems. And of course in that's humor. So there's some channel in music that kind of not necessarily reaches the highest levels. But he uses some precognitive mechanisms to deliver important information by going to the memories and going to motor behavior, going to the feeling of well-being. And I think this is a very important thing in the discussion about music therapy, these precognitive mechanisms. Well, you were mentioning the limbic system as well. I mean, there's certainly a lot of sort of... Sure. I think one of the things is, again, the hierarchy of music development and how it gets paired or how it's parallel to other aspects of functions. So something like the structure of language is also parallel to the structure of music. So when somebody loses the ability to verbally communicate, the structure of that sound can inform some of the linguistic elements. I mean, there's so many... Same thing like the motor system has parallel pathways to our processing of rhythm. So the motor system works on an on-off signaling system, right? And so those shared pathways are very robust and shared by music as well as other kinds of function. Different from other kinds of odds because... Yeah, they are... These are fundamental structures. But I think music arose or was developed out of the fundamental structures that we as an animal species already had available to us. So again, movement as representative of activity and feeling and sound as relative to feeling and emotion. So I think music came out of our internal system. So for thought. Yeah. For thought. Let's talk about neonates. You can put some. So pre-verbal, you can't be any more pre-verbal than that. Neonates, while fetuses can distinguish rhythm in about 16 weeks, long before they can distinguish moms, voice or anything like that. We have a study that was done in 11 different NICUs that looked at entrainment, which was something that you bought it before, in stabilizing and reducing O2 saturation, heart rate and respiratory rate. And so these are... They couldn't be any more pre-verbal. There's no such thing as music psychotherapy with a neonate, at least not verbally. But through entrainment, not mechanical entrainment, we were able to stabilize and actually lower heart rate and respiratory rate and stabilize and oxygen saturation. In utero, you're saying? No, these are neonates. These are neonates. Okay. Thirty, two weeks, maybe. Do we know if that kind of an approach would work with animals, non-human animals, at least other primates? I've never worked with animal babies, no. I mean, that would be useful to know. There weren't too many in the hospital. Sorry. That would be useful to know. It still wouldn't quite tell us about species specificity because the in utero experiences might have differential exposures to music, although you can control this with reared monkeys, of course. But I mean, it would be useful to understand whether it's a very kind of low level physiological thing that would work on any mammal or at least primates or, you know, tractors and words. Yeah, this is what we're talking about, periodicity. Yeah. In the last four. Sure. Yeah. I have a kind of hypothesis about these differences between language and music that most likely, they both came from the same route, which is the vocal production. So it was first signaling system in animals. It's expression of well-being, expression of danger. It's the vocal production. So gradually it was development into two, like, bifurcation. So one branch became language with precision of communication. And here we come with ritzelages, et al. The neurons that neurons were involved in creation of language. Okay. So I'm just a little skeptical of the mirror. Yeah. But anyway, so anyway, somehow we came to those cognitive constants. On the other side, we get emotional component of first signaling system going into music. When it was discovered that sounds hips to two relationships, the hierarchy of those relationships that allows us eventually to develop melodic thinking. So we have rhythmic things, which are working for movement, for language, and for music, but we have something very special that works only for music. It's a relationship between musical sounds, tonal relationships, that allows to create melodies. And those relationships are very primitive. So it doesn't matter what will listen, a simple melody or complex piece played by symphony. It's the same very simple principle of tonal relationships that could be explained as interplay between dissonant sounds and consonant sounds. So we have difference in pitch. And then not a lot of them. We have very few elements of music. The parsimonial of musical matter is fantastic. There's basic seven elements, the atomic scale, plus five chromatic scales, and they repeated the game cyclically. But the relationship, this is what's interesting. They work like phenomenal fills of gravity. We have very stable tone, and we have all other tones, the difference pitch, that have different level of attraction to this tone. And this is how we travel in tonal space. And we don't need to be trained to get it. So there is no words in music. We don't need to learn that this is mal or chord or chard or cad. We just know, okay, this is something that's going on. And we tune to that. And there's just relationship between different musical sounds. And it happens, I guess, on a very simple level. We don't need to be trained to understand consonances. So this is a little bit because we can see different responses, brain responses in newborn for consonances and consonances. And we can have studies, and we already have studies. If you're two months old, you play for them consonances and they recognize it. But at that point, they've had two months plus, you know, a few months in utero experiences with Western tonal music, right? And that's why recent work on the Tumani in Bolivia, this is led by Josh McDermott at MIT suggesting that at least the valence aspect of consonances does not seem to be culturally universal. And even though people living right nearby in Bolivia who have had exposure to tonal music do have a preference, albeit it's still not quite as strong as it is in MIT undergrads or whatever his control group is in the US, the Tumani who have very different kind of music, they just don't, they can tell the difference and they can do control tasks like they will judge, you know, crying as sad and laughing as happy, but they don't have the preference for consonant sounding as kind of happy and pleasant and the dissonant sounding. Yeah, absolutely. It's just interesting. Recently they had a pilot study with adults, Lebacievsky. And we, so we were looking into the variability of heart beat, heart rhythms, and we played different music. So one of the pieces which was loved every body was second movement from Mozart Concerto, I think, when it's when it's third. And everybody was just happy to listen to that. As a contrast I took a parole there by Schoenberg which is quite dissonant. I could imagine one of the participants was particularly attached to this space and I was thinking how it happened, it's possible that those idioms from the atonal music, they kind of went into popular culture through films like suspension, something that needs to happen and people like it. So it's not necessarily a balance. It's just different because there's a perception of dissonance as a consonance. It's body responses, perceived tension. And there was studies starting from 80s that demonstrated that this perceived tunnel tension actually translates into physical tension. This is why I like so much of thoughts about enrollment of motor system because I believe that when we listen to music it's not just rhythm that involves, let's say, our like basal ganglion, but it's built into system of muscle responses, fleeting responses to music. And this is how people memorize melody perhaps. It's not that they remember just auditory information. It's possible, it's just a hypothesis. It's possible that it's our body, but remember those fleeting muscle responses to melodic information. And this is why music is so available because motor responses, they are the simplest ones. The feeling of tension is pre-meval. If something not right, they are tense. Is everything okay? They are relaxed. And this is what music exploits. You are saying it's just a kind of thing, but if you look at individuals who are either born paralyzed or are lacking limbs, they can certainly experience music in arguably as richly. So it's not the case that the motor system is a core part of experiencing or enjoyment. It's just something to keep in mind. I'm thinking about the studies that Sandra Treehop had done about language development in newborns and how their ability to process a range really close sounds at birth are all similar no matter what part of the world they come from. And then as they get exposed to their mother tongue through just being in the environment with other adults, that window of change happens pretty rapidly. So they stop perceiving these nuances of microtones between pitch and actually start going to whatever is the most constant in their native tongue. So I think all children when they're born have a broad range of perception as long as there's no damage to the auditory cortex. So it's cultural how these other nuances. Even the visual response, I'm thinking we were just talking about Joe Lidue's work in memory and trauma. A newborn who doesn't have the ability to understand the word around them is only developing visual memory from birth because they can't put things into contextual meaning because it's all experience. And so a lot of trauma that becomes really deep seated are these visual memories that become part of our makeup that we don't know about until somebody helps this process that they're coming from. So a lot of why early, early development is on the visual system for sure because we don't have the cognitive constructs to make sense of it yet. You know it's interesting hearing you talk about like how the brain is a very efficient mechanism and it will pare down those pathways that it doesn't need anymore. And Jamshed Barucha who for many years was at Tufts and then at the new school grew up playing both Western and Indian classical music and did an interesting presentation at a World Science Festival panel that we did some years ago where he just kind of drew all of these like connecting lines between, you know, it was just like a schematic diagram of neurons and how, you know, if you'd grown up in one set or another, all of these lines would have disappeared and you would have these 12. But growing up in two different traditions simultaneously, he had all these neural connections and for him the idea of the kind of the flattered sixth and seventh of certain raga scales was as natural as the perfect fifth and, you know, the major third which by the way if you hold a major third for a long time, it is crushingly dissonant. Our major third is the Western major third is off by a tiny fraction that when held over a long period of time becomes increasingly clear to the, whereas if you're, you know, because we, our Western sense of harmony is a human creation. The Bodger's, yeah, but you're this beautiful, overtone serious based skill. Our third is, it should be a ratio of four to three, but our third is the twelfth root of two. Because we can not. And irrational non repeating. Well, it makes me think when, you know, when I was talking to people at Yamaha when they developing the digital keyboards, one of their challenges was to make the acoustic experience rich enough because when the well-tempered clavier was developed, you know, Beethoven was composing for the string instrument or Bach, sorry, but, but composers at that time. And I'm thinking about Beethoven only because certain pieces that were done with violin and piano were done in certain keys because of the acoustic response of like an E flat and the key of E flat with the violin and the piano as opposed to if you were playing by Hopsichord, you know, or something else, you know, where it wouldn't been as close. Yes, fantastic, fantastic case of the simplicity. What happened during the, during the 16th century, the temperate scale was actually discovered mathematically in China for completely different reasons. And then Europeans knew about that at the end of 16th century. And they did not want to apply it purely to the beginning of the 20th century. They tried to dance around that. So if you look at historical tuning, they all tried somehow how to salvage the naturally solid scale. And well-tempered clavier was one of the variants of temperament Bach liked that. And the well-tempered clavity, you have penalties with, you know, modest key signature which are closer to natural scale than the nullities with extended kisig which are like 5-6. They really sound bad. But most likely he used that. Well, but even Bach, you know, when he sat down and composed, he had to first decide, am I using Verkmeister 3 or Kurnburger 2? I mean, he had all these positive tunings available to him. And you know. And they all had different effects. And that was the point. There was a famous treatise called the affect in there, the doctrine of effects by Johann Matheson probably in the 18th century that, and Pythagoras did this, you know, 2000 years earlier, where he went through all of the keys and said, you know, the emotional impact. This is the emotion. This is the, this is the effect of E flat, which is why Mozart saved E flat for certain things and G minor for certain other things, C major, you know, for the coronation mass, you know, because they felt those differences. And there was a whole kind of scientific, quote unquote, you know, scientific as they were in the 18th century, trying to figure out what each scale did to us, did to us emotionally. So, so our, the way we perceive dissonance is actually evolving. Absolutely. Oh, yeah, because E seven sharp nine is not an ending chord until you listen to Jimi Hendricks, right? That's right. And it's evolving not just as we go along, you know, as, as a culture, but it's, it evolves in each of us individually because, you know, I, if I, as a kid, I would have heard Mollar and just thought, what's, what's that noise, you know, you have to grow into a, you know, you have to evolve your, your own sense of hearing. Otherwise, I mean, this kind of brings us right back to where we started because if it doesn't mean something to you, you can't use it. And that's why there's no human in music therapy, why it's such a process because we don't know what that person's life experiences with music and we don't know how we can use that music to really reach the elements or to achieve the goals that we want to achieve or they want to achieve. We want to help them. So it is this detective work. You can find out who they were, what was their life experience, how does their body respond to sound, how did they mentally respond to sound, what are the associations and feelings they have to sound. So all of that comes into play. I mean, it's, it's like being a good doctor too. I mean, somebody comes in with all these symptoms. You have a sort of a checklist of things. It's not, you know, and then you try to figure out and hone in where it's coming from. You can see therapy is sort of pulling on a thread and seeing what comes along with it. Do you remember in the 1980s, you know, at the height of the New Age music movement, there were all these records coming out that made claims of being quote unquote healing music. Yeah. Personally, I found this stuff to be like itching pattern. Yes, yes. It was like crazy. What is this? What does it, what does it heal? I mean, this is a therapist, one of my pet peeves is the, this idea of the healing power of music. Well, as far as I know, there's no empirical evidence that music heals anything at all, but it can certainly be used in a healing process. Yeah. So did I stir something up here? Yes. We still did not, not mentioned very important system, the biological reward system that music is able to activate. It was found that extremely pleasurable music activates nuclear circumstance, which is a star of our biological reward system. So maybe it is one of the explanations to diminishing sense of pain that's kind of destructive. And I don't know if it's explanation for people who have better recovery from stroke when they listen to music as compared to listening to books or white notes. Anybody wants to talk about the pleasure? And do you think that they did find an effect? You're talking about the Finnish study? It was studied by Zator and Blocke in 2001. This was the chilled one. Yeah. It was also one that was passive listening. Yeah. And basically ganglia modus system, so there's sound effects, all these different systems in our body, and each one of them has a different effect with music. Yeah, but it's actually strange why? What is it in this language? It's, you know, the biological reward system is also activated by food, sex, drugs, money, chacentic, very tangible. What is it about music? It suddenly enters the same company. You know, in the blood and blood and laboratory study, each, they studied 15 musicians, I think it was 15 professional musicians, and each one had a come in with their piece of music that gave them the chills and their very specific measure in the piece of the music so they could do the imaging, right? But what they used as a control was each other's piece of music. And so, you know, the person who responded to the Argentinian tango music didn't respond to the cult train piece the same way. So again, it shows us that our emotional response is to music, a really life based on life experience. Not so much the, what's the system is developed based on our personal experience with music. Or maybe it drives the emotional system first, and that's why we gravitate toward it. A static emotion. It's such a difficult thing to parse. So it's presence of beauty. It's cultural construct that you grew up. Your personal memories and your psychological makeup. It's all just confined. Yeah, that's not universal. That's very subjective. Yeah. Very individual. Very individual. But this also goes back to something that you were talking about before, which is the kind of the predictive. I mean, what music does is it plays with, which is why we like repetition in music. The brain is very happy to be able to predict what comes up. You know, I hear a one, four, five chord progression. I'm betting it's going back to the one, and when it does, it's like the brain goes, ah, I knew it. But the brain also likes the surprise. Yes, it's right. Which is why. When people talk about the money note in a song, it's like usually when you hit the note that you expect to hear in the melody, but the harmony underneath it has modulated. And suddenly it's like, wow, what was that? You know, so it's not like the cell phone interrupting the symphony, but it is, it's a very fine balance between being able to predict and the element of surprise. Yes, absolutely right. I just want to also mention that there is some beautiful work in the developmental literature suggesting that infants at various points in age have some optimal amount of information that they like. So if the signal is, and you can imagine doing something very, very simple, like showing them sequences of, you know, familiar objects, and they get really bored if they get shown the same thing over and over again, and they also get bored if they're shown completely unpredictable sequences. But there is some optimal amount of kind of predictability and surprise, then they'll pay attention for longer and longer. And then of course that also changes. The amount of information we can handle changes as we develop, but it's certainly the case that there may be something really fundamental about repetition and music, and that's why maybe at the very young age we get so interested. I mean, you know, those of you who have kids know that kids like repetition, right? They'll have the same book right over to them. Like so many times in their own, it's like there's clearly not much new information, but they like the fact that, you know, they know what's going to happen in the story and they can kind of, you know, participate in this. And so there, now the question of why we came up with a system like music that uses that repetition. And it's an interesting question that goes back to the evolutionary question, but for the evolution, I just want to mention one thing. So indeed, there is a hypothesis that music and language somehow co-evolved through vocal communication, but there's also a strong alternative which is actually now perhaps the dominant hypothesis for the language evolution, which has nothing to do with vocal communication, but instead has to do with gesture. And a lot of the observations basically come from the fact that in primates and vocal signals are very, very constrained and very context dependent, so they'll have a very particular signal for this kind of predator, that kind of a predator. And a system like gesture is much more tied to the kind of social cognitive mechanisms that are evolving over the course of the last few million years, where something like trying to get someone's attention by manipulating an object and trying to see if you get like shared eye contact on something that I'm trying to do your attention to or something like that. So a few theorists have now argued that actual language may have come about through the motor system through gestural and potential, you know, body. But I think this is basically the erytzalld is, and his group is, it's gesture, it's a moment of gesture. Well, it's a full gesture. A lot of people have made those arguments, if you read, like if you actually read the way that Rizalati talks about it, it's very, very vague and underspecified. It's true. It's very hand-wavy. I mean, so if that's satisfying, you know, I just know it's a beginning. Yeah, like in everything else, it's a beginning. Yeah. I don't know, I'm not sure if you want to begin with vague things always, but anyway, it's it's a vatable. But they do believe that music is basically an emotional component of vocal communication. Yeah. Well, Stephen Finker. Stephen Finker, you know, famously, just considered it a kind of an offshoot, a byproduct, a beautiful one, but just an accidental byproduct. She's a cake, yes. Yeah, an auditory cheesecake. And then you have someone like Gary Livingston, Yale, who posits that the two grew up in, you know, on parallel tracks from a similar kind of urge to express oneself. Okay. I would like to hear a response to a certain bias or a assumption. I think we generally have, not only in this discussion, first is the assumption that music is about sound, but there are a lot of other aspects to it. I mean, there's a social aspect. I mean, it's been mentioned a visual aspect, right, which I think are, you know, they're a sonic elements, but I don't think they're less important than the sonic aspect. And the other one is the notion that music therapy is beneficial. Well, you know, strong medicines sometimes have undesirable side effects. And I'd like to hear if there is something like that. In other words, I think we need that, something like that, to fill out a picture of what the boundaries of this phenomenon are. Well, I could definitely speak to the negative effects of music. So when people talk about music can be therapeutically beneficial, some of the dangers because of the things we spoke about are the negative effects of music. And people, I mean, people who have epileptic seizures, for example, can be prone to seizures if a rhythmic pattern is too strong of the volume or the frequency of the sound is too much. And so, I think that's a very emotional memory is associated with certain types of music. Playing that music for that person could be very traumatic. So similar to medicine, where you have trials and you see what works and doesn't work, you have to be really careful to not just say music is very therapeutic for everybody because each person is going to have a different response. So I'll speak to that piece and you guys could speak to that first part. I'd like to say something about what your first question about or your comment about other benefits of music. One of the things that we use in our enhancement of melodic intonation therapy is the injection or interjection, I should say, of musical thinking. And so one of the ways that we empower the patient to take on the therapy themselves is by training them to create their own target. So people with severe nonfluidophasia can't get started when they want to say something. They know what they want to say, it's infuriatingly frustrating for them because they have exactly what they want to say in mind and no way to get it out. So the way that the therapy actually works is that therapists would hum first what the phrase is going to sound like and give the target phrase. And once they're trained to do this, they learn how to sing on the inside before they open their mouth because the mouth takes them down a motor path that they can't get off, they get stuck in this loop and they keep saying the same thing over and over and over what they don't mean to say. So if they think first and hear it inside and then do this in a rehearsal as a musician would if you're going to practice something on your own. Then they begin to learn how to not only make their own target but to begin to self-assess and troubleshoot as they go. And if you stretch these sounds out and the beauty of the singing is the connected speech because non-tluent aphasic can get out of burst and the burst and the burst and maybe it's just the initial consonant and they keep on repeating that like a stutter. But if you breathe first and you make this breathing part of your inner target setting and your inner rehearsal, you breathe and then you put it out in one piece, they don't lose it in the middle. They're able to keep their whole thought together, they're able to keep that whole piece of whatever. And it doesn't really matter what the music part sounds like. It's about that thinking and that when they walk out the door they're not stuck with a set of 20 phrases to practice. They've got their own thoughts which they can then get out by using musical thinking and a musical process without the music really being the important part. So that's just one example. I'm sure you have a ton of those. Connie said about the dangers of indiscriminate use of music and therapy. Let's say I'm in radiation oncology in the waiting room and I really like stairway to heaven. I think that's a nice song. We're knocking on heaven's door, something I really like to listen to. Right. You get... Yeah, not very good. Another thing, neonates, it is very easy to overstimulate. A neonate with prerecorded music that's just left on. Even somebody in the coma, too much arousal could be detrimental in the early stages. Somebody who's in the vegetative state, they could still have a level of arousal but too much sensory stimulation can actually be adverse. So really being careful about what's... Can I just close the whole up a bit? So there are real issues with the use of music. I'm just curious if there have been any attempts. So I'm actually very interested in the social component. And it seems like even in the kind of therapy that you guys do, it's like very... Well, I don't want to say easy but it may be one of the easier things to try to pull apart and see what's the presence of you sitting there playing a guitar versus you sitting there and talking versus hearing a recording of you but maybe having a curtain, right? So that they can't actually see the person. And just kind of try to pull apart and figure out which bit of it is. Because I would really enjoy having you and play guitar. Like having you sit here and play guitar for me. That's lovely, right? I mean, who wouldn't like that? But the question is, what is it that's particularly helpful? Is it the social bit? Yeah, so interaction. Music therapy is at practice. Music psychotherapy, it's about relationship with patient. It's about the space that's created between two people. And music can be the motor or the context for that...for forwarding that relationship. You know, we did a study once... I don't want to take away from your questions but we did a study once where we did try the control for the social aspect. And so we were looking at people, homebound adults who had depression and who had medically complex issues. And so we had the music therapists go and visit them and engage them in active music making. But then we had a social worker, a recreation type person who would be the social visit would have that one-to-one contact with them and play games. Maybe chess or cards or something like that, right? What was interesting is that the psychiatrist that was the psychologist who was doing the testing was blinded to who was in which treatment. And there was one group that just had the traditional psychotherapy treatment or medication treatment that they had. So the person who just had the traditional treatment, actually the depression went up, increased the person, both the social one and the music therapy situation both had a decrease. But the music therapy intervention was decreased by half. So it was the music too, right? That's an excellent control. So I think that goes to your social aspect of music. There's a communal aspect of a shared experience that is more than just the person, but it adds to the person. So there's something therapeutic about people moving and being together. But the music adds another level to that. Only what I was thinking of was a particular piece of music, which is, I think at the title, but the John Cage. Well, the silence is the other. It's that, right? What 33? The silent piece? For 33? Yes. What 33? Right. And I think that's a music without any kind of sound which is prescribed. And certainly it has very big social aspects that no recording can come even close to. Which brings us to the challenges of music experience because all those other nuances of the experience itself adds to the perception of music. There is a recording of the first performance for 33. That's true. It took place in an open air shed upstate New York. It is utterly beautiful. There's no quote unquote music, but it was gently raining. And the birds, there are no walls, so you hear the birds. I mean, it's a beautiful way to spend four minutes and 33 seconds. The piano was never touched. The pianist turns the page at the end of the first movement, turns the page at the end of the second movement. And the rest is the music of the world around. Yes. Okay, go ahead. First of all, this is fascinating. So thank you for this. I wanted to ask, well first I wanted to just talk, when you were talking about the evolution of music and language, I've often heard it theorize like the baby's hearing the heartbeat for weeks at a time. And so the rhythm is just entrained. I don't know how you would ever actually prove that. Also evolution, like in the early days, the importance of timing and rhythm as far as hunting and surviving. But my question is, sorry, let me just get my breath. My question is, we're talking about with music therapy often. I don't know what diseases, but when there's some sign of recognition to music. I'm just curious why there wouldn't be also maybe like a hand of recognition from like a relative's voice or like, I'm curious what is it that, why, why, even not my own language to help? I think the comparison, one of the rationales for why music is more resilient than just simple voice is because of the other dynamic elements involved in music. And the voice, although it has tone, is very linear or not as dimensional as music, whereas music has rhythm, harmony, speechless too. The emotional aspect, a lot of the recognition, you would think that somebody's voice would have the same emotional response or arousal. But it seems that the complexity of music is, which is a lot more, or recruits so many more networks in the brain than the actual sound of somebody's voice. Some smells have also this very powerful ability to bring this back. But dementia and some diseases like Parkinson's, the olfactory cortex, I mean that sense of the smell is one of the first signs that is a problem that dementia is early on. Thank you. This has been fascinating. Now you're talking primarily about the most complex organ and progress and understanding it has been very, very slow. I've been watching some of it, but not all of it. Nancy Kenwise, there was at Rockville yesterday and outlined some of the research, recent research. We've got new tools, MRI, PET scanning, transcranial stimulation. How do you see the research in this area going forward? Can I answer that? I'll tell you. Last month I was at NIH with 20 neuroscientists, music therapists, state music therapists, and 12 neuroscientists at the invitation of Francis Collins because there's been great interest in how the brain works and understanding complex systems. With trying to understand is there a therapeutic aspect to music and can we study that in a very conservative way? They've made the commitment to start funding music brain research. The initial partnership is with the Kennedy Center and NIH and there's actually a big conference on June 3rd where they have presented some of the present research, but this is Francis Collins says they're going to dedicate effort to this because it really speaks to the complexity of our brain and how systems integrate on very fundamental levels as well as very complex levels. So it's not so much studying music for the aesthetic aspect of music, but actually studying it to really understand how complex systems operate. That's the best news out of Washington and the British. I was interested if there were any big cases from musicians or people who had interactions with music that were driving the research forward. I had two possible. There was a jazz guitarist named Pat Martino who had Asia and then he, I believe he taught himself to play guitar by only listening to his own records. And then there was Edwin Collins who was a Scottish singer who I saw him, he had a massive aneurysm and I saw him perform after and he had to walk with a cane to get to his place on the stage and his speech was very difficult to understand as he was introducing his songs until he started singing and it was like the record. That really speaks to the resiliency of those overlapping mechanisms that remain despite injury. So with Pat Martino, he had, my memory, meeting him, he was at one of all conferences, he had a stroke and actually had to play, learn to play the guitar again. But once he did, that mood and memory came back and another person was Ruth Brown, the R&B singer who lost his speech totally after stroke and actually got his speech back by listening to her own recordings and singing along. Well, I don't know if there are big cases but we have a stroke choir at the Lewis Armstrong Center for Music and Medicine that takes place every Monday afternoon, five o'clock. And it is related to an IRB study which we're conducting and we do have some stroke patients who are musicians who are in that. And what I can say, I don't have access to the data yet because the study is unfinished. But there is a very easily observable change in getting back some of the skills that they had as well as speech. Are they able to recover things that through music that maybe non-musicians might not be able to recover? I have no idea. These kinds of comparisons are really hard to make. You'd want a group that's match for IQN, all sorts of other socioeconomics. There's some interest right now. In fact, some of the sciences who presented a couple of weeks ago were talking about the type of enhanced networks that get developed with music. I'm thinking of Nina Kraus and some of her work at Northwestern. For example, a good example is a person no matter how many music lessons you had when you were a child, when you're older, even if you haven't played the musical instrument, you can actually discern sound to noise better than a person who was a non-musician. I've never had musical training. The idea that you can process complex sound or separate meaningful sound in the noisy environment is enhanced through purely having music lessons as a child. We had a patient who was a percussionist who had a stroke and he had a right-side paralysis and a periesis. The traditional rehab therapy is to really focus on the good side and really allow that side to take over function. Because he was a percussionist, he already had bilateral representation of the motor system. He already had another representation of his right hand to work on even though he had lost that motor ability after the stroke. They started doing, having them do bilateral exercises where he actually gained the right side back. Hi, everyone. My name is Ann Anas. I want to just thank you so much for being here. I have a background in jazz as a jazz musician and I also just recently finished my master's in speech pathology at the BU. And we got to, I got to be a co-founder of thephasia community choir up there. I'm sorry. I'm excited. This whole talk and everything I've learned in the past three years has me excited to tears. And I just am so happy to now bring this back into my practice. And my question is very practical. I'm living out in New Jersey now and getting ready to go into practice. And even though we all embrace these benefits and we also want to be very careful about how we talk about the research and be very balanced. And there's a lot of clinics and places, you know, even in this area, in this day and age that are still surprised to hear, oh my gosh, a stroke patient could sing and he couldn't talk. And it's a very new concept. And I want to be able to talk about bringing my experience and my clinic practice into these facilities, whether it's a sniff or a private clinic. And I'm having a hard time starting the conversation when people kind of have this idea that, oh, isn't that nice? Some music therapy in the speech clinic room, isn't that nice? It's a nice quality of life thing. But is it really clinically, like some of the other questions have been asked, clinically valid? And how to get that conversation going and maintain it and keep it going? I would love to hear your discussion about that. That challenge has been going on for a very long time. I think the challenge, and we talk about this in the field of music therapy all the time, is that music is so much a part of our experience, everybody's experience, that we sort of devalue the therapeutic aspects of it. And so you think of music as an art form, you don't think of it as a treatment, you know, and I think that's both the American Music Therapy Association and other organizations have been doing a lot of advocacy at the state level and at the federal level to inform people about the therapeutic, you know, the real research. One of my institute, the Institute for Music and Neurologic Function, was founded back in the 20-something years ago to really bridge the field of emerging neuroscience at that time and clinical music therapy. So both could inform each other in advanced practice. I think doctors and people in the medical profession no longer just say that's really nice and sweet because they understand that there's other mechanisms at work in recovery and it's not just one treatment fits for all. Because we're starting to understand the complexity of neurologic function, that we can sort of appreciate what music does. And so I think people are more receptive. What's going to drive it, I think, is, I won't say money because that's not going to help but somebody had made a comment. If you could make money off of this, there'd be a lot more people behind it. And you know, like the pharmacy local to something like that. So I think the other thing is that if consumers, if there was enough consumer experience that they demanded it, the Census for Alternative Medicine at NIH were formed because consumers started asking for certain kind of alternative medicines and the government was challenged with the need to research it. Nine billion dollars out of pocket in 2000. Right. And that's what was happening. So I think what if as parents of kids with autism or people who've had strokes who are learning to recover speech as they learn and hear about what music therapy can do, they're going to start asking for it. And the more people are informed, it's like we have to do this major PO marketing campaign and educate the general public. But there's good research now. There's good scientific research because we can understand and see these brain make that we couldn't see. You know, Oliver, Dr. Sax and I back in the 80s, early 80s, actually met with a group of neuroscientists and said, can you help us study music in the brain? And they said, no. You can't study music. Look how complex it is. It's, you know, so many different things. But now we are. Now we're able to, you know, piece a plot of different elements of it. I think that, again, I don't have a sense of how big the field of music therapy is. And I realize that there's many different kinds of disorders. But one thing that I would find helpful is, as a basic scientist, and I'm sure patients would find that helpful. It's often, it's to have like a unified website that would have links to all of the good research. Because I mean, there's such a wealth of research. And it's often really hard to evaluate the qualities of maybe like some kind of studies that at least have been maybe replicated once. There's some kind of, there's actually some white papers. There's a couple of white papers on the American music therapy. So musictherapy.org. And if you go to conditions, there's actually pieces on PTSD and early childhood development and learning. You should be nice to have it like all in one place. Like climate change people now have like really nice websites with like a lot of means. And to have it categorized. Exactly. So that's a good idea. So some of the places where you can have people look are clinicaltrials.gov. So anything that's ongoing now or has been finished that they can then look up the research. That's a good place for people to look. And the other thing is one of the things that I find or we have found over the years is people are concerned. I'm not a singer, they'll say. I can't do that. I'm not a singer. And the important thing to let people know is it's not about being a singer. It's about being a person who has this preserved area in their brain. If it's a stroke person or somebody that's had a traumatic brain injury, they've got a part of their brain that works. And there's a very nice, there are a couple of very nice apps. I don't know if you know about these brain apps that you can show a 3D brain to people. You can turn it around and show them this is a part of your brain that's not working the way it used to. We're going to train this part over here. And so they feel like I have this healthy thing that I can work with now. And you can assure people that this part of your brain is just fine. And that's the part we're going to use to help you get better. So I think to allay people's fears about the singing not mattering at all, I've actually worked with several people who are tone deaf. And it's not so much as I said before about the musical thinking that it is about the way it sounds when it comes out. It's really not that important how it sounds. It's about getting out your thought. Just a final question if I may regarding basically inversion to what extent we can turn our attention to doctors as musicians themselves and what distinctions you might notice between colleagues who approach the medical application of music from a training of musical, either professionalism, musical theory, et cetera, and then how would you characterize that kind of training as a fusion of music and medicine or as a bridge between the two. And in particular even though I realized the panel isn't approaching this from the perspective of the musical industry itself, if you can offer any reflections on doctors as practicing musicians or doctors entering musical performance. Okay, a quick question. Doctors as using music and medicine in a clinical context, all the doctors that I work with see many patients every day. I don't see them being really enthusiastic about providing therapy with music or any other sort. Music and medicine is a very interesting topic. It is a growing field as well. I'm trying to think of how many doctors I work with their musicians, actually quite a few. But they haven't ever expressed a need to participate in the music therapy sessions, but they have been very enthusiastic about these music therapy with their patients. One of the things I think, and I don't know if this is what you were asking, that the creative approach to problem solving may be something that is more apt to happen with a musically trained doctor than someone who is purely scientifically trained. And so I think in a lot of the medical schools now they're actually encouraging the physicians as part of their medical school training to do the creative arts in some way. To really get into those non-verbal type, also their own personal feelings in certain situations so they can be more empathetic and open to the nuances of where the patient presents them because nothing is ever really just clear, clear, black or white. So I think that way of creative thinking that's part of the music training is something that they're trying, some medical schools around here are actually trying to view, I think while Cornell. The ICON school has it. And ICON has it, yeah. And while Cornell. jazz pianist Fred Hirsch put out that record a couple of years ago about his experience of almost dying and the medical profession and this kind of coming together of musical practice as part of the training of these doctors who were able to help him, that's the substance of what his album of, I guess, three years ago was about. There's a very vibrant community of medical professionals in Boston that the law of the symphony orchestra actually, which is all medical professionals and every concert they do is actually benefiting some area of research that needs to be done. So they're trying to raise awareness in that way and perhaps what you suggest will come next, I don't know, or maybe you know of something like that. Even something like listening, you know, being able to listen to a patient and the nuances of their verbal expression is something that a musician is more apt to be able to do. So some doctors actually encourage to listen to music as a way of understanding the nuances of speech when a patient comes to them. Okay. Thank you. Thank you.