Our roundtable today is composed of an intriguing mixture of musicians, producers, and theorists,
all of whom from their unique perspectives have thought deeply about how we might understand the emotional impact of music.
Where do these emotional experiences arise?
And are these experiences unique to each listener?
Or is there some universal quality to the way we all react to music?
In the Helix tradition, we encourage the participants to discuss first by themselves and then among themselves whatever they think is relevant to these issues.
And we'll see where the conversation takes us.
Let me introduce today's participants.
Let me start off with Greg Calby is a partner and senior managing engineer at Sterling Sound in New York,
in New York City.
For over 40 years, Mr. Calby has mastered more than 7,500 albums in various genres,
including the work of rock artists such as John Lennon, Bruce Springsteen, Paul Simon, and David Byrne.
In the jazz world, his credits include Miles Davis, David Sanborn, and Branford Marcellus.
And in the current indie rock field, he's worked with such cutting-edge artists as Alabama Shakes and Passion Pit.
Jesse Harris is an accomplished singer, songwriter, guitarist, and producer of artists all over the world,
best known for having written and played guitar on Nora Jones' breakout hit Don't Know Why,
for which he won the 2003 Grammy Award for Song of the Year. He has also had his songs recorded by numerous other artists,
including Smokey Robinson, Willie Nelson, and Emi Lou Harris.
As a solo artist, Mr. Harris has released over 10 albums, including his forthcoming release entitled Born Away.
Marina Corsakov Crane is a professional pianist and scholar in music cognition.
Her research is focused on emotional responses to music and on perception of melodic transformation.
Her recent work on music in the brain addresses musicianship-related brain plasticity from the point of view of a music cognivist
and practicing musician. She was trained initially as a pianist.
Currently, Dr. Corsakov Crane collaborates with researchers on imaging studies in perception of motion-internal space.
She is the author of two books, The Universe of Music and Music. She is the only one to talk with me.
Dr. Gilbert Rose served for many years on the faculties of Yale University Medical School
and the Western New England Institute for Psychoanalysis.
He is the winner of the Sander-Lorand Essay Award of the Psychoanalytic Association of New York
and the Founders Teaching Prize of the Western New England Psychoanalytic Society.
He is also, and currently a member of the Gardener Program for Psychoanalysis and the Humanities at Yale University.
He is currently in private practice of psychiatry and psychoanalysis in Row Aiden, Connecticut.
Dr. Rose is the author of several books, including Trauma and Mastery in Life and Art,
Necessary Illusion, Art as Witness, and Between Couch and Piano, Psychoanalysis, Music, Art, Neuroscience.
And the power of form.
And the power of form, a psychoanalytic approach to aesthetic form.
First book?
First book.
First book.
Finally, Alina Rubenstein is a psychoanalysts in private practice in New York City.
She is on the faculty of the Institute for Psychoanalytic Education, affiliated with the New York University Medical Center.
Dr. Rubenstein was raised in a family of musicians and has played the piano for all her life.
She has served as a juror for the first four piano competitions for outstanding amateurs,
established in 1999 by the Van Kleibern Foundation in Fort Worth.
An avid chamber of music participant, she performs in concert several times a year.
Seven years ago, Dr. Rubenstein also began studying the cello, wishing to explore non-percussive techniques
of producing musical sounds.
This is our panel.
And we'll go around and each person will start and talk a little bit, and then we'll talk among ourselves, Dr. Rose.
Well, let me tell you how it all started.
I was between 10 and 12, something like that.
And browsing among my parents, 78s, I came across something which knocked me out.
It was Jiekovsky's fifth and sixth symphonies.
And I didn't know what hit me.
So, I got in touch with my best friend Eddie, Eddie Danziger, who was all my traitors, damps, other stuff like that.
And I said, listen, you got to hear this.
And I put on the fifth or the sixth.
And he looked, he listened, and he looked very puzzled.
I said, what do you think? What do you feel? He said, is it a steam engine?
Well, from then I learned that music does not necessarily carry a message.
Well, the same message to everyone.
Well, it was sometime after that, that when I got acquainted with more sophisticated things, let's say at age 14,
I discovered that when my elder sister, who later became a disciple of Landowska, was playing the Beethoven sonatas,
I discovered that the best possible place to listen to Irma playing the Beethoven sonatas was lying under the piano.
The sound was fantastic.
Well, it was a third discovery, and that was probably around the same time.
I discovered that if when I listened to music, I would conduct at the same time with the record, it was so much more satisfying.
And so I marched around the house, conducting the music along with whoever, and I found it very, very gratifying.
Now, in a deeper sense, what I found was that it's all about motion.
And later on I found out that motion and emotion are inseparable.
So let's put me on to another thing.
And what did it lead to? I have some notes here.
Yeah.
Yeah, that was...
I'll skip what I have here and say something else.
Later on I found some literature that music was capable of releasing jump-starting, in a better word,
jump-starting people from devastating neurological conditions, temporarily, of course.
There was something about music that went straight through.
And now I'm not going to read all of this, don't worry.
I want to read something to you.
Anne was in a late stage of vascular dementia.
At earlier point, she would succumb nightly to escalating panic and agitation, uncontrolled by drugs.
Music, however, could restore a degree of calm.
Now she was no longer subject to panic.
She was mostly withdrawn and indifferent to music, as well as the presence of intimates,
whom she may or may not have still recognized.
She really spoke. When she did utter a word or two, it was without any affect or any obvious referential content.
What about art? And whenever I have to say about music goes also for what I think about art,
I think they go through the same way.
She had been an avid painter in a twice-run around the gallery.
The painters had been among her closest friends.
One day she was shown color illustrations of Monet and abstract paintings of Jim Eurenst, an old friend.
She looked them all intently for many minutes and went unswerving attention,
asked what she thought. She replied immediately and with the intensity that had once been so characteristic.
This is really beautiful.
Then, more astonishing still, it goes straight through.
So, what goes straight through?
Shall I tell you briefly or shall I tell you?
What goes straight through is the implicit motion, which is what music and painting is all about, not actual motion, virtual motion.
And the internal motion of affect.
And I have theories which I won't go into about what is it about each of these in terms of tension and release.
But I can say this, that when the external tension and release buried in the music or the art goes through to the internal tension and release of affect,
there is an at-wanness.
There is a unity. And this unity is at least for some of us, part of the experience of music.
There is a oneness. In more technical language, there is an increased permeability of the ego boundaries of the person.
So, there was. I think William James put it best when he said the arts, among other things, and we didn't say about the arts.
He said it about varieties of religious experience. He said they alleviate the solitude of individuation.
Not only, it's not limited to music or to art in an aesthetic moment.
It's certainly characteristic of times of being in love.
And as William James knew better than anybody, he was also characteristic of some varieties of religious experience.
And at-wanness.
So, what kind of a contribution does this experience make, if any, beside the moment?
I think it makes a contribution to one's affect regulation and also a sense of one's relationship between itself and world.
And I think I'll shut up now.
Well, his reaction to Tchaikovsky seems really pure.
And I keep thinking about how today music is much more tied to popular culture
and has a lot to do with marketing.
And so it's interesting to see how music is marketed and people respond to it based on how it's marketed to them.
And it seems to me like a less pure connection to it.
And I feel that music more than ever is marketed for the listener as opposed to being a pure expression.
And I even think that popular music in the past seemed more pure, at least emotionally, than it does now.
And I think that the end result is exactly what he said about it alleviates individuation
because I think it's exciting for people to feel connected to a hit song.
But sometimes I listen, I think, are they actually listening to the music?
But sometimes I listen to pop radio, not because I like it, because I want to see what's happening.
And you notice a lot of songs that are about going to clubs and stuff like that.
But I think that music makes people feel really excited.
And for me personally, the way I listen to music is sometimes based on wanting to feel a certain way.
Yeah, I guess less alone in a moment, but also maybe happy or maybe not necessarily sad, but understood by another artist.
I also think a lot about how I listen to music.
I prefer to listen to vinyl records.
For some reason, the sound connects to me more.
And I don't know, it just feels warmer and more human.
I've talked to Greg about this a lot.
But in terms of my own writing, that's something that is more of like a habit, I guess.
And I don't think so much about how it necessarily connects, but it's strange when some songs connect to people and others don't.
And that's hard to identify.
But I feel like I could just keep rambling and talking in different directions.
Yes, I would like to make a small remark about your friend for whom...
Is it your microphone?
It's about your friend who did not recognize music in the fifth and sixth symphonies of Chikovsky.
There is a very small percentage of listeners for whom music is not available.
It's a very interesting condition. It's called Amusea.
And people just don't recognize anything.
They don't have...
Maybe a little closer to...
I mean, melodies because they are not able to recognize patterns of music.
Because when we listen to music, we actually listen to musical sounds, which have very interesting relationships.
They differ and they perceive tension. It was another very important word mentioned today.
So when we listen to music, we listen to patterns of tones. It's like listening...
In distribution of different levels of energy and tonal felt.
I don't want to talk too much about it. I want to go back to Amusea.
So there is a small percentage of people. They are not able to recognize music.
But everybody else is gifted from birth. We all are experts at birth.
Because our auditory system is ready before they are born.
We already listen to music before they are born.
And even two four months old babies recognize the basic, the most important melodic element of music.
Consonant intervals and dissonant intervals.
Moreover, they are very...
The way music...
Convey information is very simple.
People can say it's primitive, it's perceived tension.
This is why music is available for everybody, even for people with very serious cognitive problems.
We are all able to recognize music. It's incredibly generous art.
By my vacation right now, I am applied philosopher.
I am post-trained as a classical pianist in Russia.
But then I became a cognitive scientist.
It happened to study emotion. This is the last area I wanted to study.
Because it's very difficult and it's very difficult to talk about emotion and music.
But we still can measure something which would help us recognize some of the aspects of this magic which we call music.
The experience of listening to Tchaikovsky for the first time.
The first thing I thought about was when I was a kid, my dad was a real blue collar guy.
He had a bread-rout delivery guy.
And if classical music ever came on his radio, he would always turn and say,
I hate that suicide music. He would always call classical music suicide music.
So growing up, the experience I had besides the suicide music was the classical music that he used to play on the morning cartoons.
But I don't know if any people who made those cartoons have produced them understand that that was extremely valuable to somebody who grew up in a house where there was no such thing as classical music.
So the first time that I went to a classical concert was a Leonard Bernstein, a young people's concert.
And it was an experience which affected me for the rest of my life because the beauty of it and the intensity of that point it was Carnegie Hall.
But I'm not 100% sure I was somewhere at eight or nine years old.
But I remember the sound of the orchestra along with the fact that it was a music that it found very exotic to me.
It really carried me into the field that I'm in right now and have been for 40 years, which is audio engineering.
But as far as emotion goes funny, in the last few weeks I had an experience which really spoke to what we're talking about here.
I had the opportunity to see this new show on Broadway opening up called Motown. And it's just a history of Barry Gordy who founded Motown Records.
And in the beginning of the show, the first scene is the temptations and the four tops.
The guys playing those groups have kind of like a competition with each other.
And it just literally plays these songs from really my teenage years.
You know, people on this panel are all different ages, but this is a very musically such a formative time when your emotions and your connection to music happen.
And I found myself three or four different times completely tearing up.
I wasn't sobbing, but my eyes were watering. I was getting the chills and I was feeling something I just didn't understand.
So after the show, my wife and I went out to dinner with another couple good friends of ours.
And I said to the woman who's a, her name is Suzzy Road. She's a really great musician on her own right.
And I said to everybody, I said, did anybody find themselves crying? And Suzzy said to me, yeah, a couple of times also.
And we do not know what the trigger was. I mean, nostalgia is one thing.
And I know that if someone grew up in a different time and never heard that music before and listened to it, I don't think they would be crying.
And it also led me back to another situation that happened to me about 15 or 20 years ago in my studio.
A guy that I grew up with had really close friends with him in the eighth grade. He became a Franciscan monk.
And still he's a Franciscan priest. And we hadn't seen each other for years.
And we connected on the phone and he came to the studio and he brought a cassette with him in the cassette days.
And was an artist, yes. Okay, great.
Why, I called him the mic, though.
It felt so professional.
So, it felt much better.
So Kevin brings this cassette of Yani. And no offense to anyone here. Yani is what I would...
When my way of thinking is kind of an insipid form of kind of new age-y kind of music.
And he put this cassette in and the sound quality of the cassette was...
It sounded like he probably had dipped it in a cup of coffee before he came in and then put it in the machine.
It was horrendous.
And I was listening to this. I was looking at my speakers which was professional studios.
And I'm just going, oh, this is unbelievably horrible. And I turned to Kevin.
And he's got the conducting things in his hands, pencils.
And he's doing this and he's crying. He is coming out of his eyes.
And internally, I'm laughing. Because it's the worst thing I've ever heard. And to him, what he said to me was over.
He just said, I can't thank you enough. That's the most beautiful I've ever heard that.
Now, I'm not criticizing Kevin, but I'm just saying that this is the kind of thing when we talk about music and emotion.
It speaks to so much of what music is about. The personal nature of it, the emotional nature of it.
What we bring to this, you know, in my day-to-day work, I frequently get music sent to me from Asia.
More and more recently, China, Korea, and Japan.
And the other engineers, and I always kind of have an internal laugh we have with each other.
But the Japanese rock is completely like another language.
I mean, it's like, you don't understand the words, but you really don't understand what they're doing musically.
So there's no emotion. So yesterday, just yesterday, in my studio, I had a Japanese jazz artist, a very, very talented woman plays marimba, like this giant marimba.
And she saw one of these CDs that I had done that was, in my mind, was awful.
And she looked at it, she went, oh, why is this great? This is great.
And she really had to have this. And she's a very sophisticated musician.
So the relative nature of all this stuff and the emotional connection to me is really fascinating.
And, you know, I think with the group that we have here, we really have all different generations.
We have different, somewhere we bring into this. So I'm happy to be here talking about it and see what we come up with, you know?
Thank you.
Well, I grew up in, I would say, bathed in classical music. My father was a concert pianist. So I...
I also started out under the piano. An excellent place to start.
And also trying to manipulate the pedals and competing with a younger brother for the pedals.
And don't remember, actually, when I started to play the piano, but it just seems like I always did.
But that's, I think, probably a very common experience that you just feel like you all.
You don't remember when you couldn't play. But it was never enforced. It was never forced on me.
But I just loved it from day one. I played with four hands with my brother. Can you not hear me?
Not too well. Not too well?
And, well, anyway, I was sort of considering, I wasn't really considering having a career as a pianist because I knew only too well the downside of it, which is, you know, traveling all the time.
And some people love that, some people don't. It doesn't make for a very stable life, really.
And the other part of it was my generation was the one, when I was a teenager Elvis Presley, erupted on the scene.
And so you can figure out where I fit into the scheme of things.
And it was also a period of time, though, in certainly in classical music, women were very little represented at that time.
And the thought of being, you know, the reviews would say things like, for a woman, you know, she played pretty, and you basically were sort of restricted to, you know, most women to Mozart and stuff like that.
And, well, something just happened.
To where Mozart.
Mozart, right.
But I was, and after a few starts in other areas, I was briefly a graduate student in comparative literature.
And I really wanted to go to medical school, but as I was saying before, it was also a period of time where not too many women thought, especially who came from families that didn't have, you know, doctors or scientists in the background, they didn't really think of that.
But that's what I ended up doing.
And I always sort of was gravitated towards psychotherapy and psychoanalysis, I think in part because I think I'm a reasonably good listener.
And I think there was some, I can't think of the right word, correlation there between listening to music, you know, as I did.
And listening to people various, you know, carefully.
But I've become even more, I mean, the other part of it was that since my father was a musician, my grandfather, my brother, and my mother and sister were both dancers.
So, I mean, we were really surrounded by music in motion.
And the conducting went on a lot at home too.
But I've always been just so passionate about it and about hearing it, the emotions that it evokes in me.
And I'm connecting to what you said, I think that those are very subjective and that the form, the formal aspects of music lend themselves because they can't be translated into words.
I don't think this is working.
Okay.
It lends itself to projecting whatever emotion and or meaning if we can try to define that, that one wants to.
If you want to feel a certain way, you may know that certain music will evoke that kind of feeling.
You'll put it on and kind of enjoy having the feeling, including sad feelings, including, you know, some of the negative feelings.
But I think the main thing that I really find my connection to music is in actually playing it, making the sounds myself.
And I've always played the piano and as I think you said, I took up the cello about six years ago, which was a little bit risky given my advanced stage.
But I thought maybe it would stave off dementia among others.
But that wasn't really the reason.
Because it's not that easy.
But I always love the sound of the cello specifically.
And I'm always very interested in why people are attracted to certain kinds, certain particular sounds.
And I think they are.
And also, I wanted to be able to sustain a tone, which you can't do on the piano.
And I could go on.
And I had a religious, I'm not religious, but music is a religion for me.
And playing the Bach Suites was another goal that made me take up the cello.
And I could go on and on.
But I won't at the moment.
Can I ask you a question?
So, I mean, obviously playing piano your whole life and now cello is a new thing.
But is there a way to figure how you feel?
I mean, asking to shrink how you feel is funny.
I mean, is there a different emotion that you get from yourself when you play cello?
Are you at that level where you can actually feel like you're pretty?
Well, one of the other things that you're reminding me of is the piano is a giant piece of machinery.
And you're not going to be able to play with wood and metal.
And when you play with other people, you're still not sort of in the music in the same way as if you play a string quartet or whatever.
Because the thing that has to be away from everybody else.
And you're usually making the most noise and often in classical chamber music.
You never get a break.
The melody instrumentalists usually have to breathe or their arm gets tired.
So, one turn our pages in between the, you know, the, you know, sixteenth rest that they give us.
And I wanted to be able to play in like a quartet or in a group where I vibrate the strings along with the other people vibrating their strings literally.
I mean, you want to be on the same wavelength to use all the slightly corny metaphors.
But the other thing about the cello, obviously, is you can wrap yourself around it. It's a very sensual instrument.
It's not as big as the bass, which is a little too big, especially for somebody like me.
But the cello is just perfect. It has that shape that allows you to embrace it.
You feel it the whole instrument vibrating when you play it.
And, you know, you can't be more in the music for me than that.
I'm sure singers would say that they, because their instrument is actually their body, literally.
But the cello is as close as I felt I could do.
Have you found other players?
Oh, yeah.
Now, now I have, it took me about two or three years to make a sound that I didn't want to run away from while I was making it, but I'm past that.
Yes.
I want to infuse a little bit of science in this conversation.
You mentioned dimension.
I want to go first to children. The recent studies showed that already after six months of studying, children show advantage in memorization on tasks which are related to IQ.
We also know today that people who studied music in their childhood, they showed certain kind of age defiance and their cognitive functions at all the age.
And as a music educator, I would say everybody, don't put aside your desire to study music. It's never late.
One of the best cases in my practice as a piano teacher was a 63-year-old beginner.
I registered Newers who became a wonderful pianist just in couple years, but she was very disciplined.
You were person.
Did you want to say something?
I'm sorry?
Then you want to say something?
Well, it wasn't direct.
I'll say something.
But I'll raise it now anyway.
To my colleague here especially, I read a PhD thesis recently for an institution.
It was about, well, one specific thing about it.
It talked at the end about musical listening and made the point that for a therapist to listen musically was a very big asset.
And what the point that she made was that you're listening both globally to the overall and at the same time for details.
And it struck me that this is, I think, that I recognize something in that.
And I wanted to, from you and your experience as a therapist, analyst as well as a musician, this thought makes any sense to you.
It makes sense, but I don't know that I would necessarily be aware of doing it at the time.
And I suspect that most analysts listen, you know, and they hear repetitions, they hear themes, they hear variations on the themes, all of which are musical concepts.
But I think I enjoy listening in general.
So I think that's one of the attractions.
But I also, I think I'm, I like to be aware of the nonverbal aspects of the treatment too, which I think music is more in some ways connected to.
And I think also connected to the earliest mother-child matrix.
And I think you raised that point.
And I feel like that's something that I'm more aware of attending to as an analyst.
The silence is especially.
Somebody said that the most important part about music are the rests.
The space is between the notes. Who said that?
The notes are on.
Only Mozart.
But also the silence before and after, which I think are not really necessarily thought about.
So you listen to music in order to restore the silence and listen to the silence.
I think that's a very, for me that's a very important idea.
This is a conversation.
Can you hear me?
Yes.
This is a conversation about emotion.
And as a educator, I just cannot help myself, but try to understand where they begin.
It's kind of ambitious task.
But my doctor will study, actually, address this task.
Music psychologists, when they talk about music, they say,
tonal space.
So when we listen to music, we travel internal space.
And you mentioned motion, most important thing.
And actually my lectures were called,
motion internal space and emotion.
It's produced by motion internal space.
I want to just say just a few little things about the origin of tonal space.
And for this I will need this piano and I'm sorry to bother you,
but I don't need to touch the piano.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Oh, yeah.
I'll just take the phone.
It's in two.
So when we listen to music, we listen musical sounds, which actually have a status in this tonal space.
Imagine that in music, the relationship between sounds, like relationship within a society.
When I play a simple scale, the tones of the scale they differ in their frequency
and pitch, but most importantly, differ in their attraction to first note.
This is very unstable.
And this is very stable.
And I want to play two very short samples to explain why music is something like tonal force field.
It's going to be the beginning of a prelude from Will Tempered Clavier by Jürgen Sibachinbach.
And it sounds very peaceful now with...
So what happened that in the tonal space we suddenly found ourselves very far away from stability.
And this is how we perceive music as a pattern of stability and instability.
When it's unstable, it gives us feeling of tension.
When it's still feeling of release.
And this is what we listen to music.
This is why music talks to everybody because the morphological principle in music,
the way the message, the communication structure, is very simple.
It's understood by everybody.
It's either sound harmonious or not.
This is what four months, months they do not like.
They like this.
They like this and people don't like this.
So the music is made from tense and relaxed elements.
But the magic begins when those sensations of tension and relaxation are sequenced in time.
And the best explanation of this was done by Susan Langer, a wonderful American philosopher.
She told that in music we have logical emotion.
Not just emotion, but logical emotion.
It's not something we suddenly frightened of.
Or we are hungry.
No, in music what is given to us by music is a complex aesthetic emotion.
It's like living through life again.
We live through life again.
In time, this is the only little art which is so tightly connected to time.
It's humanized time.
So when we listen to music, we listen to those sequences of
tension and releases, they work like triggers for our neurophysiological system.
And somehow those triggers, they create emotion in us.
Now think how we all react to the outside world.
And not only will, let's say some little animal.
If something frightening, it would be tension.
If we have a nice dinner, a nice friend, a tuck in his friend,
they are relaxed.
This is the simplest reaction of the living organism.
Tension and relaxation.
And this is what music imitates.
Tension and relaxation.
And those sequences of tension and relaxation, they create emotional state.
Very strange thing.
I think it's really magic.
What about music that's all distance or all tension?
Because some people don't like to hear consonants.
They like to hear noise.
I think that's all right.
And it was actually a moment, kind of a gracism moment in 20th century
against the dictatorship of the analysis.
But the first is, it kind of coincided with changes in societal structures.
That would happen when Schoenberg, who was called a tanales to his great tradition,
introduced a new system which defined the role of the analogy, the tension and the release.
The system was quite strict.
But it's interesting that musicians listened to autonomous music.
They still are trying to find some points to tie,
and find some system of reference because when we perceive this world,
we always perceive it in some system of reference.
If it's a real world, it's a Cartesian coordinates.
If it's music, it's a scale, just simple scale.
But this analysis is a wonderful, expressive element.
And if you look into, if you hear to music by Bach,
he predicted a lot of things.
He predicted autonomous music, polytronome music, and whole tone scale.
You can find everything. But of course, then we had Liszt,
who was a tremendous revolutionary Wagner, and then in 20th century Schoenberg and Bergh,
and then kind of extreme, it was Carl Haus and Sinoquez,
who used acoustic music, just random numbers.
And he created some sounds, some masses of sounds, but not tonal sounds.
So in music today, we basically talk about tonal music, about melodies and harmonies,
and this music lives in this simple, simple scale.
I'm just wondering with Jesse and Greg, in terms of popular music,
in terms of, let's say, post-punk music, which seems to have no
integrative, which has no restfulness to it, which has no scale to it, as I understand it,
how you would see this fitting in with the kind of classical music.
As we were going through the different composers and the different elements in the classical form,
I was trying to kind of equate that with my world.
And Jesse's world, and the people who are involved in popular music,
I would say all the way from early 60s up to now, which is a huge buy-up work now,
and actually being studied academically.
And people bring so much emotion to what they expect from their music,
and as far as dissonance, I mean, there are people that go to rock shows
specifically to feel aggressive, to feel more aggressive than they are,
to find a safe place for their aggression.
I've always been amazed by the people that come into the studio
when I'm working on a heavy metal album.
You might have noticed this too from the people that, you know,
these are the gentlest souls that I've met.
For the most part, the gentlest people that I meet,
the most aggressive people that I meet in my business
are the hyper-intellectual kind of new music people.
Well, the poets and the people who are searching to be unique are the hardest people.
For me, those are the hardest people to deal with.
Those are the people with the edge. Those are the most insecure people.
They're looking for a special place in the music.
But the people who, like for example, are into heavy metal,
there's a sense of community. I was thinking about this before.
There was a film that many of you I'm sure saw recently called Amour
about. It was a fantastic film.
You remember the opening of the film from the stage out into the audience?
It's a classical piano. Did you see the film?
Fabulous. Fabulous film.
But the beginning is a classical pianist gets on stage.
You don't watch him. You watch the audience reaction.
I swear it's about five minutes of just watching people in stillness.
You're looking at this and you're wondering, what is everybody thinking?
What is each of these individuals doing there?
When I go to a concert, and my wife and I go to maybe two or three
a year and done frequent concert, goers.
To me, there's a sense of isolation.
You're listening and you're emoting to the music internally.
Rock music is not like that. Rock music is like a celebration of the artist
and in community with the people who are there, who've also decided to come
and enjoy it together. This type of music will fuse people together.
This is across many genres, I think.
It's an appreciation. It's a support for the artist as an individual,
which I'm sure in a classical show if you really know the performers
and you know the cellists, for example, and you go and watch this fantastic
house and there's that feeling. But for the most part, I think people go
to internalize the feelings of the music.
This is not, Jesse, maybe you can speak to this as well.
I find that the communal, especially in the 60s, there were groups in the 60s
where if you went to see, for example, the incredible string band in 1969,
everybody in the show was on LSD.
And you knew that.
And you knew that they were and they knew you were.
There's a community based around this. And this, to me, is the same thing.
And exactly the same thing is if you go to the Abyssinian Baptist Church
on a Sunday and everybody's singing, it's a religious type experience.
And I think that communion, exactly.
And I see this when I go out, I see this, it shows.
And to me, it's a very, very interesting thing.
And because when you speak to someone else's music
or they speak to the music that you don't understand, you tend to kind of drift back.
They mentioned downstairs, Justin and I were speaking and talking about a couple of artists
that maybe some of the folks never heard this.
Everybody kind of gets in their little corner.
Well, I don't know what they're talking about. I don't know what they're talking about.
That's what's great about the classics is that we all have at least some knowledge of that,
whereas Passion Pit, most of the people in this room probably haven't heard.
You know what I mean, though.
I totally agree.
Sometimes it makes me uncomfortable when I go to concerts because it seems sort of like
I don't know, like some sort of hero worship or something.
And sometimes I feel the people think they have to act a certain way,
especially these days.
And even the way that they cheer the music is a certain type of sound that they make.
And it makes me uncomfortable.
And sometimes I don't even think they're listening to the music.
They're just going to live out the experience that they think they're supposed to, you know.
They act the way they think they're supposed to act.
I'm being cynical, I think.
But I do feel...
We've been around it a lot.
On the other hand, this is something that's come to mind for some reason,
but I went to see Randy Newman perform in Central Park once, maybe ten years ago.
And he just played the opening chords of, I think it's going to rain today on the piano.
And the woman sitting next to me burst into tears.
And literally just burst into tears and shrieked and put her face in her hands.
So, I mean, popular music can have an incredible impact like that.
I keep thinking about how it is today.
And again, a friend of mine said to me once, it was John Zorn actually.
He said, I think people, and he's someone who makes all kinds of music.
And for him to say this is pretty interesting.
But he said, I think people just listen to music that makes them feel cool.
He said, they just want to hear, you know, they just want to feel cool.
And so they're like, cool is, I don't know, maybe, maybe, I mean, this would be really reductionist,
but maybe you put on classical music because it makes you feel cultured, you know.
Or you feel like, I'm being, I'm sorry, I know that there's more to it than that.
But maybe you feel like you can create your own world when you put on that music and you listen to it or you play it.
And you know, you can shut out the rest of the noise maybe, you know.
And for people who like rock, they put on the band, they like, and they feel like, I'm cool too, you know.
I practice.
Yeah, I practice, first of all, classical music grew up from popular music.
You know, when Luther in Protestant Germany was working on creating, you know, vocabulary of hymns at the churches.
Some of his songs he used had very questionable content, just obscene content.
And he would say, we should save it from the clutches of devil.
When you think about the best melodies like Schrubert, he wrote 600 songs.
And the main formula that popular music uses, it's the same.
It's the main formula of melodic motion.
And this is what the box, uh, uh, uh, period starts with.
This is all. It's like the law of notion in Newtonian physics is three chords in classical music.
Three chords, everything as is derivative.
So, uh, there is not huge difference.
It's just some classical music, like, same altered.
Orchistakovich, ochigoski, it's just somewhat more structured and carries a lot of information,
which is not perhaps easy.
It's easy, but it's just different kind of information that, um, that, um, let's say heavy metal of, uh, popular music and carry.
It's just different levels.
But the matter is the same.
Now, if you were talking before, you were mentioning the importance of tension.
And right after that, you were speaking about the importance of release.
But that's the whole story.
Tension and release.
Patterns of tension and release.
Certain ones will correspond with patterns of tension and release in different emotions.
And I think that's what goes straight through.
The correspondence between patterns of tension and release in the music.
And internally, with certain effects, makes a click.
It goes straight through.
I also think that popular music perhaps uses reasons more aggressively and more aggressively.
And it actually just kind of minds on our physiology because we do have this regularity in our lives.
So it's rather on the side of our ethnicity, than on the side of militarism.
But I don't see any chosen between them, frankly.
There's a record I was just listening to this morning.
I just think people might find it interesting.
It's popular music.
It's a young artist named James Blake.
And it's an interesting record because it has all the elements that you're talking about.
There are these long moments of silence where you think the song is over.
And then all of a sudden the song keeps going.
And then it seems to stop again and then a beat comes in.
Some of it is acoustic piano, some of it's electronic.
I think it's worth checking out.
I just wanted to say, get back to something you said before about you put music and other arts together.
And I'm not sure if I totally agree with that.
Of course I'm biased, I'm sure.
I think music is different in the sense that first of all it's invisible really.
When it's being played, where is it?
It's not like something you can touch or look at or anything like that.
And it starts and ends in time and therefore uses uptime in a certain way, sort of mimics what happens to us over time too.
So I really don't like to lump it in with the other arts, although I'm certainly not as knowledgeable about it.
I'm talking about the aesthetic of aesthetics.
The aesthetic of aesthetics.
And the theory of aesthetics.
And in my theory of aesthetics, patterns of tension and release exist in music in their own ways, in their own language.
And as they exist in, let's say, painting.
Matisse says, a line is not just a line.
A line is a stroke against the indifference of the background.
He said to his students, try to find out where that line is driving to go.
He's talking about the dynamics of visual aesthetics.
Just as you were talking about the dynamics of the piano, when you play the scale, you can't leave it at the seventh.
It has to go to the eighth.
It has to resolve.
That's tension and release.
Now it's in that sense that I'm putting the work together.
I just have always felt that music is much more embodied in a certain way.
It's just because it picks up on our body rhythms and because it's not visible, you know, and it vibrates in you.
And I guess to me that makes it, I mean, and then how do we talk about what it means?
There are no words.
And even with painting, it seems to, or the plastic arts in general, it seems as if it might be easier to talk about them in words.
But music is such a challenge.
And this is an aside, but I have to say in spite of my great love for psychoanalysis, I never have really forgiven Freud for being a Viennese Jew who had really little interest in music.
I'm sure there was an issue there.
And he also got rid of his older sister's piano because it was annoying him.
So I just wanted to get that on the table.
Well, he also confessed that he could not bear to stand any odd unless he knew what the meaning of it was.
And that's beside the point.
The meaning of it is the reaction you have spontaneously when you first hear it.
And then all the other meanings that have come in the course of time and the stages of life go through different meanings.
They're attributed.
I'm talking about this spontaneous reaction, which I think has to do with patterns of tension and release in one language of music and in another language in visual art, but still tension and release.
I have very important things to add because we talk about pleasure of music.
So I have to talk about neurophysiology of perception of music.
It activates biological reward center, which is also involved in our pleasure of food and sex.
And another thing about the...
Does all music do that to certain...
Pleasureable music.
But that's somewhat subjective.
No, no, no, this is what they found. It could be a music designer, actually.
It still activates biological reward center, pleasure center.
And just a very minor addition to conversation about these communions when music is very loud.
It could actually be dangerous for our auditory system when I see cars with small children and there's very loud music.
It also hurts me because I know that the poor child and his parents could suffer a loss of hearing in our very delicate organ of courty in our cochlea.
They have outer inner cells and outer cells like Celia.
They work as amplifiers.
And if they're destroyed and they can't be destroyed, if there is a consistently loud sound, they cannot be restored.
This is why people can start losing their hearing, their theories.
If they work in a very loud band.
Well, we could have an entire seminar about hearing loss and loud.
I mean, loud is part of the world right now.
I mean, I have the audiologist that I go to says when he started, he's in his 60s now.
He says when he started all his patients, he was in his 30s, most of them were in their 60s,
he says he routinely gets people in their 30s now, have severe hearing loss.
People are using the in ear headphones and running and spending hours and hours with that pressure on their ears.
Cars, I mean, I'm sure everybody in this room has left at least one restaurant.
I've left maybe 10 restaurants a dish in the last two years because you couldn't hear the people on the other side of the table.
I mean, that's another, you know, that's another whole thing.
But, you know, it really makes you wonder, like, why is this?
Why do people like loud?
There's some stimulation from loud.
Otherwise, people would shy away from it, but so many people, I'm not one of them, but so many people need loud.
They need the distraction of loud. They need the physicality.
I mean, the guy who comes next to you in the SUV where you hear everything and your car is moving like this and his car is shaking like this,
he's getting something from that. He likes moving. He likes his ass moving in that seat.
And there's something really important about the physical nature of music for people, but, you know, the body is not really adapted to this.
I don't think it was always like that. I think that's what it's about.
The technology has developed to the point where you can drive around and you can have, you know, 250 dB in your car.
And the restaurants now have, you know, the ability to have speakers everywhere coming down from the top and the sides.
You know, in the 50s and 60s, when we grew up, we didn't have that.
So I feel sorry for the kids.
What it indicates with a kind of music which is both loud and where tension predominates over relaxation.
I'm talking about kind of music that you would know, which is very different than Schoenberg, you know,
and what is it about the times that we live in, the period that we live in, where this seems to be how people are recognizing themselves in painful music almost.
And a kind of addiction to tension.
Well, what Greg does dictates a lot of how music is heard, you know, in the mediums that we have today,
because when people go to have their albums mastered, what Greg does is the final stage of that,
and he can change the way the music sounds, depending on what people want,
but most people go to Greg because they like his aesthetic, but at that final stage, you can make music more aggressive.
You can make it louder or you can make it softer, you can make it brighter, or you can have more bass,
and that has so much influence on your perception of the music.
And I've had certain albums of mine that I had to have remastered completely because the first take that the mastering engineer, not Greg, by the way,
that the mastering engineer had did was too aggressive, and he just figured, well, I wanted to make your music like other people's,
and bring out that sound and bring the volume up.
When you bring the volume up, you bring up an aggressive feeling.
If you let the volume go down, you know, stay in a little bit of a lower point, then you can have music that breathes more.
But most of the records that are made these days, I think they go for the highest level that they can get.
They go for sound, they kind of push his forward, every element kind of becomes equal,
so that the feeling is kind of like listening and being like pushed into a wall,
where, I mean, Jesse creates music different than this, and the opportunity that I had to work with him a few times,
and he'll be part of create music that has, when you say dynamics, it means you can feel the variation in the amplitude of the different instruments.
So you have much more of a rhythmic, you have much more of this rather than this, and people, musicians, I think a lot of musicians have been around music so much,
and I think that they almost like, it's like I have one sugar, I have two sugars in my coffee, I have six sugars, I have six sugars,
and I'll have a little bit of a five hour energy, and it's almost like an addiction for excitement, but you kind of lose the perspective.
So, you know, I deal with people in a way that I have to understand what is going to, I have to do something that they're going to approve.
My work is for the artist to get something that he wants, and a lot of these artists need that feeling of excitement,
and they also need the feeling that when they play something compared to someone else's music that it has as much intensity.
So, in that way, that intensity to that person could read forwardness, and I've worked with a lot of musicians lately,
who are almost deaf in their 40s. I mean, it's really unbelievable. I'll do things, and I go like, I can't hear what you're doing.
It's like I've been on stage two long, or, you know, it's, the thing that strikes me about this conversation that we're having is how, you know,
all our different experiences depend on the types of music that we listen to or involved in,
but you know, you keep pointing up the universal nature of the experience, and I think that's a good combination of what is it about the music,
and different kinds of music, and then I'm sure everybody in this room at times today has kind of like zoned out,
and then other people are like, oh yeah, I understand that.
It's a very, very personal thing, our feelings about our music.
Well, I think one thing a psychoanalyst, you may not agree about the need for intensity and volume is in order not to listen to what's inside.
Inside your own head. Yes.
To get away, escape.
Exactly.
Mm-hmm.
I agree.
We've decided.
To listen.
I have a number of hats.
Consider it settled.
Well, music is an escape into another world.
And, you know, when I was a kid, my father's Sinatra records, that was a visit to, you know,
52nd Street in the 1940s. I had never been to 52nd Street. I wasn't born until 1949.
I never went to jazz clubs, but, you know, to read, to hear Sinatra's world, and to hear the horns,
and everybody just creates a visual, you know, like an imagination.
True.
And these are little climates, little rooms that we walk into with the different music,
and it's, Jesse is fascinating because you've been doing a lot of international recording,
and you've been in Brazilian, and you write in different genres. Maybe you can discuss a little bit of how you, you know, you kind of write folk genres
and, you know, in more rhythmic Latin America and South American.
Well, I mean, what I was thinking of actually was, because we've been talking so much either about classical music or popular music,
but just about, I don't know, maybe more indigenous music or folk music and have had functions,
and also tonally have that functions because a lot of that music has nothing to do with the scale that we've been talking about at all.
And yet, it can reach a level of sophistication equal, if not more, to the Western scale.
And those tensions and releases are completely different.
And so that sort of calls on the question that basic feeling of what, you know, the human, the universal human response to sound,
because actually in other places it's not the same.
But it seems to me that it's culturally determined all over the world.
It did.
It did.
It was a study recently with people listening to music from different cultures.
Exactly what you just have.
And they found that there are, there are non-anounce people respond to it, just tiny differences.
Yeah, the cultural differences again, but still the most important things are captured.
So something about music, it's really universal language, somehow it reaches everybody.
Even if it's kind of a very distant culture, it still arrives to us.
But I think what you're suggesting is that the patterns of tension and release are very
different and there are all kinds of cultural things.
But the basics that must be there in every culture, that is a way of kind of integration
which human beings can't live without.
Absolutely.
Very different.
Because we listen to, we're very used to a pretty even meter.
But if you listen to music from other parts of the world you can't even tell where it
begins and where it ends.
It doesn't seem to have a meter, some of it.
And furthermore it seems at times to be speeding up and slowing down at the same time.
And people can, they do this just naturally, that's how they play and that's how they
hear things.
But yeah, I mean, sure the response to music, whether no matter what kind of music is universal.
Yes, people are moved by it.
In fact, I would even say perhaps they're more moved by some indigenous cultures because
it is in fact religious.
It's ritualistic.
I think you have to be exposed from a very young age to whatever kind of music, to really
appreciate it and have emotions in response to it.
I mean, I think if you haven't grown up hearing classical music, with people who love it,
in that setting, why would you?
Maybe even more.
Or any other kind of music.
More mysterious in that because I keep thinking of what you were saying before about you and
your father.
He couldn't listen to something and couldn't hear it at all.
You listened to something and it moved you very, very much.
And it's a kind of mystery as to what it is that even with you that allowed you to hear
something and know that it spoke to you and that those rhythms were responding to some
difference probably between people, between effective organizations that people have.
What that has to do with education and class is very complicated.
It is complex.
I mean, I remember in the 60s when you meet somebody, and I was in my 20s, and you meet
somebody 60 years old.
They're like, I love the Beatles, they would say, I said, wow, how does this person who
is 60 years old like the Beatles, when this is like in the 60s?
You very rarely meet someone.
And then they would say, I love that song, Michelle, or one of the real melodic ones.
But there's a cultural barrier to cross.
And I'd be curious in this room how many people have listened to hip hop, then all of a sudden
it's like, you know what I have to do?
They want hip hop song.
I really like that one.
You know, I mean, how many people are open to that?
Or how many people just as soon as they hear the genre, they hear the style just, whoop,
it's not mine, it's not mine.
Just close right up.
And you know, no matter what the lyrics are, no matter how socially relevant they are,
melodically just like, that's not my music, I'm not going there.
There's a certain music that we can't hear.
We literally can't hear.
Yeah.
So I wanted to take some, if there are questions that people would like to ask, the participants,
please go over to the mic and you could just say who you are.
If you want to name, is that it?
Sure.
That's Roger's.
I appreciated hearing that Freud had no experience of music.
I think it's an experience.
Well, he rejected it.
And I find that it's a mystery, is anyone writing about it?
I think that's phenomenal.
Do you know if anyone is writing about it?
I think it's been, I mean, I must have read it so.
Do I have something Google for that something?
Well, what we're talking about was people being locked in to look with, with genres that
they wouldn't listen to, wouldn't listen to us thinking of the movie Mr. Holmes Opus,
where he played a classical theme.
It was the mid-Yewen G, but they knew it as a toy, as a Motown song lovers could cheer
it up.
And sometimes it can, and sometimes it's like, it's like that, sometimes you can just
take one song sometime to one little piece that's just a little bit different when somebody
might start to embrace it when they didn't embrace before because it just touches them.
And I know that also, well, I mean, a lot of British rock and 60s did borrow.
They were magical classical music from American blues.
It was like a hybrid, this is the thing going on.
It's just like this playing, this is a thing, music is taking grove over time.
And I guess this really is that whether there's some extent that any particular genre is
being monolithic and it's not really not, it's always been some variation within any type
of music.
And there could be one particular song that somebody heard that from either a group,
and they might want to give them, they would consider giving a lot of their kind of music,
another listen, just give it another chance.
The modern hip hop music uses samples from all different sources, from classical sources,
jazz sources.
You hear it all because the technology now allows you to kind of construct, the music
is not performed as much as constructed.
So now it's being constructed from all different...
Yeah, it's the kind of... in a way, it's kind of a sad thing when we're talking about
tation and release, how the only variation in volume is that it just keeps increasing,
but there's no decreases, no in and out.
It just increases louder and louder and louder.
And that's the tension part, but where's the release part coming in?
Like, something like that.
I mean, how do you get beyond it?
When does the release come in when you're hearing throbbing new in clubs, like, that's
right, don't go to the clubs because only I can handle all the throbbing, pulsating,
I think, to throw me off.
Take out the chromium for about four measures.
Thank you.
I've never been raised on classical music, just like there was never a book in my house,
but anyway, I was raised, if anything, on popular music.
So my question is this.
Don't you think it's easier to like popular music than classical music?
I'd like, especially direct this to you because you are just opposite of my background, and
because the words give you direction, and I think would help also in some of the things
you've been talking about.
The words themselves forget the emotion of the words, which I think are terrific often.
But don't you think it's easier to like popular music because it comes with words?
I think most of the music in the world, I think, does come with words, actually, and
I think that may be true, but I've always particularly been fascinated by non-music
that doesn't have words just because it's so mystifying what it is.
It's so eloquent, and yet with no words and how do we understand the impact on us?
I mean, to my knowledge of speaking about Freud again, the only two references I recall
in his work about two music were both operas because one was an often-ba-one and another
was done Giovanni by Mozart because there was a plot and words and everything else that
he could talk about.
I'm Jim Rubens.
I'm a member of a group that works with people with brain damage.
We work psychotherapeutically and psychoanalytically, and we have been in touch with the man who
is both a psychotherapist and suffers from the phasor.
He had a stroke.
His name is Harvey Alter, and he runs support groups for phasics.
I've heard him speak, he mastered much of his phasia by singing to himself, and he could
retrieve the word with the help of the music.
I had a little bit, there are groups right now in melodic therapy.
They actually work with people with damage to their speech center.
First they start with just a couple notes around and teach them to say their names, then simple
phrases, and gradually they restore speech and what's interesting, they restore speech
center in opposite hemisphere, which was not damaged.
I'm Henry Earl.
Thank you for a very interesting discussion.
Rubensstein, Corsakov.
What about genetics?
What about studies in people who are humans who are either pre-verbal or post-verbal?
You may have noticed it, but from Kyoto, a group of researchers recently reported three
subjects in which they studied sleep and what they regard as dreaming.
In the first stage of sleep, they would awaken these subjects and compare the functional
MRI to the objects that they'd dreamt about, that they recalled.
They got to the point where they could find a 60% correspondence between the functional
MRI images and the objects that these subjects recalled.
Now it's three subjects and it's early days, but I suspect there are genetic factors in
this.
One possibility is that Vienna was burned out after Beethoven and Mozart.
That was their left for poor Freud.
The other possibility is that there are strong genetic variations in the response to music.
I just wondered whether there have been some studies or there are being some studies under
way to study this, especially in very young and very old.
I'm not going to give you a direct answer, but kind of indirect.
First of all, we know that Bach family was so huge and they were so successful that very
broad Bach became a synonym for musician during his time.
And on QXR, 11 days on stop.
Yes, another thing, some 15 years ago, there was a great discussion if there is differences
in brain structures and musicians as compared to non-musicians are related to genetic component.
However, during the last few years, when there were around several longitudinal studies with
children, it showed that the brain changes are related to music experience.
They are related to greater thickness of corpus callosumonterepart, which means greater
bilaterality, which perhaps means better cognitive functions at old age, their compensation.
Other changes, for example, in acute ci-
chills that connects auditory areas with modern areas and so on.
So when- what I want to emphasize, please start making music.
Every day, literally every day, new studies arrive, which say it's very beneficial.
Just the data that was published this year, the people who studied music, they are better
on motor tasks, not only like a memory task, but on motor tasks, compared with people who
never studied music.
Would that be true if someone took a drawing or painting at an older age?
No, music.
Just a question.
And my explanation to it is that we are seeing such an integration of different modalities.
We have vision, hearing, motor, material, everything.
Thank you for coming today.
Not in your field, so the terms I use may be the wrong ones, but perhaps you can help.
My name is Joseph Cadu.
I read a review of a recent book by Oliver Sacks that had to do with hallucinations.
And the point was made that with advances in recent brain imagery, they found that people
having hallucinations, that the part of the brain that was activated, was quite different
than the part of the brain that's activated during dreams.
And the part of the brain that's activated during dreams is that part which has memories
its function.
And the part that's motivated for hallucinations is that part that not being in your field,
a call, pre-perceptual, or before there's the naming of something, but distinguishes
us from other species, our capacity to name things.
But the moment we do, we eliminate all the possibilities for what it could be otherwise.
And there's a distancing.
And so here's my question.
And also as a musician, I mean just someone who's played music, I found that once I mastered
the notation of something, I can go back to that pre-notation state of a mode of, or
what I'm doing in improvisation, that there's a return to something more basic, not something
more advanced.
So here's my question.
Is there anything in brain imaging or neuroscience that suggests that musicians, that the part
of the brain that is employed for a musician playing is different for a musician listening
or for a regular person listening?
They are not as kind of, you know, you're talking about dreams and hallucinations, what
I'm going to talk is much more mundane.
For example, in musicians, the auditory areas, like recognition of sounds, they do little
bit different to the non-musicians.
And also their perception of music is more left, side-activated because it's more analytical
in musicians.
They're more related to musical structures.
But what is interesting, that responses per se, they're about the same.
Yes, the differences in white and gray matter, musicians are related.
But responses, emotional responses are not differentiated in musicians and non-musicians.
A couple of little anecdotes and then a question.
I used to hate hip-hop music and then I started taking hip-hop dance classes and now I really
like hip-hop music.
I mean, not quite seriously.
I wasn't able to access any of the emotion of it or any of the music of it until I tried
to do it and then I could understand the vocabulary and the feeling that they were using.
And similarly, I went recently to an Icelandic music performance where somebody was really,
the performance was this on the computer and there was this kind of wall of sound that
was produced that was the concert that we were at.
And so there was very little emotion involved in that.
And so I was just wondering if you could comment a little bit on emotion and its relationship
with music, both in terms of how you take things in and out of the music to create those
feelings but also in terms of the neuroscience systems, in terms of overlap of perceptual
modalities.
I can't speak to neuroscience because I don't know much about it but I do know that in my
work I do find that my body is always moving in the work.
People comment sometime and my foot is either tapping or I'm just kind of reacting to it.
I can totally understand that the reaction to the hip hop because you're really connecting
with it at that point.
It's obvious that the music is a physical music.
I haven't been to some of these big gigantic raves that you see the people are having now
but sometimes you have thousands and tens of thousands of kids and the music is just a
pulse of physical movement.
And again you don't see much movement when you go to Carnegie Hall and you go to a classical
concert but there's a different thing going on there.
I personally in my work, and I only do the end product of the work.
I don't create the work.
Jesse is a record producer.
He creates the work from and also a songwriter so he comes up with the idea for the song and
then creates an environment for the song to exist.
And then in my work I kind of take that and I try to enhance whatever emotion that I'm
feeling and over doing it for 40 years I kind of can connect with the other creative person
who's come up with something.
I can enhance what he's trying to do.
But I think physical is a big part of what you come up with when you produce a record.
I think the classical audiences have been sort of tamed over the century because they
didn't used to be so passive and I certainly am not.
I always sit in the back row because I can't sit still.
I didn't actually kicked out once.
I wasn't making any sound but I was.
What were you doing when you got kicked out?
What exactly were you doing when you got kicked out?
Well I was just asked to.
I was just rushed and asked to leave if I couldn't contain myself.
It's a little less.
I feel exactly.
I feel exactly the same way.
I think it's barbaric that you have to sit at the concert and not move.
It's ridiculous.
And I have a private theory that one function of the conductor, aside from his relationship
to his orchestra, is that he is the symbol for all the motions that you want to make.
And your clap is much for having allowed him by proxy to express for you.
I cannot say anything about from the point of view, new to science, but I want to say
something from point of view of social culture that society culture, music does express gesture.
And if time just change.
So when you think about the Mozart, it's very easy to imagine ladies at Crinaleen.
It's very different today.
I think it's wonderful that you've found a hookup.
My name is Herb Klitzner.
I found probably the most satisfaction in listening over the last 30 years has been to
what's brought them called alternative music.
And within that you have ambient music.
And that is peaceful.
And it doesn't go very far.
And yet it's very rich and it's shifting and changing.
And I just thought it should be mentioned here and I just wanted any reaction to either
that or alternative music more broadly as trends that have been in the society that
are meeting points that anyone can listen to and yet have substance.
So that's for the most part is your ambient music is without lyrics.
This is or maybe Gregorian chant kind of music or the.
And then without lyrics.
Brian, you know, kind of things to follow there.
Well, again, there's so many individuals.
I mean, that's an excellent example for a music which is very important.
It brings another whole set of emotions and this is very meditative.
I mean, that's meditation.
I mean, I think we've all had the experience of going to a massage or whatever and somebody
puts something on and is like, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom.
And you go, well, no, that's not going to work for me because I know, you know, and could
you put some of that?
So, you know, that brings you emotionally when you listen to that kind of music.
Where do you get with that emotionally when you listen to your ambient music?
And it opens me up and it relaxes me.
And then I mean, in making music mixes which have done, have been broadcast on a stony
radio, I alternate in a larger scale tension and release using, let's say, an ambient piece
and then something that's very different.
And I get a reaction from listeners that way that keeps things fresh and moving in their
alert.
And so everything I do is eclectic with four or five genres, you know, within an hour and
a half music mix.
So listening can be rich.
Richer than it really is on radio ordinarily.
So you have a show you have a...
I did 10 years ago.
It was periodic, special occasions, but about 12 of them, about 2001 to 2003.
And I was challenged and very constructive by taking the 9-11 experience, which happened
in the middle of it.
And so I was known already to the audience.
And finding this kind of thing that would, from Estonian culture and from American culture,
would represent tensions and releases that you're in a safe place, ultimately.
And the program was repeated after a couple of weeks from the response.
So...
That's great.
Yeah.
Thank you.
What kind of music was it referred to with the Estonian music?
Well, there's music in Estonia.
It's classical.
It's a vocal by Valleo Tarmis, especially in other composers.
He had a piece called Curse Upon Iron.
And I played that...
There was a destruction that takes place in that.
And that represented me, the Tower Falling, which I witnessed myself from some blocks
away.
And I helped work on the foundations for the center I had helped to design.
It made a computer model of a 1966 at work at the Port Authority.
And then it was a life cycle of a building that I was in saying now it was coming down.
Actually, the one thing that remained that was not damaged was that foundation wall.
But it was waiting for a new building to fill it and connect.
So I did a program on that.
Sure.
What's up?
I'm Alexi Calatrak, a summit analyst.
I think everybody's doing a great job doing something that Elvis Costello said was like
writing, talking about music is like dancing about architecture.
It's very difficult to do.
But I have a developmental question about music, both for the analysts, the musicians, and
the cognitive scientists.
I think we've all alluded to and seen how musical taste changes over time.
The song that moved us when we were five, a different song would do that at 15.
And if I go to the opera and I look around at the median age, I know that all those people
there were not at the opera when they were 30.
So it tastes changed over time.
I'm curious, in other fields, in psychoanalysis, we sort of privileged the first five years
of life as determining so much that happens afterwards, in language so much we believe
that happens, needs to happen in the first years of life.
Is there a science of music development which would take into account both the cognitive
changes and receptivity at different ages that we have, also take into account the aspect
of community and mass experience, concerts and so on.
And other things like when we're older, I used to listen to the clashes first album
ad nauseam loud and I can't do that anymore.
And I listened to other things now that I never would have listened to because they were too
wimpy when I was 20.
So what are the kinds of things, is it possible to put together some developmental idea of
how we experience music?
One of the roles I was to take it.
Okay, you know, I can talk from a perspective of a piano teacher.
So you have children, they are coming to study piano.
And some of them are so incredibly perceptive.
A child at seven at eight seems to understand everything about music.
It's universal language.
The universal, melodic universal are very simple and they are given to us by nature.
But they understand the emotional content in an incredible form, in a great way.
I find it very difficult to discuss how it's related to age and to development of taste.
I only can tell you that we are all very sensitive to music.
For example, in my study I found that people, non-usicians, and I did the study in the heart
of Texas.
And it was multi-ethnic group, people from around the world.
And they recognized differences between romantic and the first unique school.
When I saw the results, I could not believe my eyes.
I had melodic, similar, short musical phrases.
I selected them from musical compositions, played them, and they listened.
I had very different tasks for them.
But one of the byproducts of this study was the discovery that people, basically, know
training in music.
They are very sensitive to the finest details of music.
They recognized, like for example, they put Schubert with romantic and with classics.
And this is the esoteric knowledge, which is, for example, it's known by people studying
piano at Moscow Conservatory that you can take Schubert as a classical composer or a romantic
composer, depending on the structure of your performance.
But it's not common knowledge, so when I saw the loading plot with these results, it was
striking.
We all give it from music.
Just listen.
Just listen.
Just enjoy.
I think, though, the thing that you're speaking about specifically of getting older and having
different tastes in music, it seems more like that your personal needs for music change
more than your taste changes.
Because I know for myself that the records that I, usually the records that I didn't
like as a kid I still don't like, because I go back sometimes.
I think, excuse me, was I wrong about that record?
Because people really still talk about this one record.
And I know when I was 16 I didn't like it and I returned it or I sold it or whatever.
And I'll go back and listen again and think, nope, I didn't like that.
I still didn't like it.
Sometimes I go back and I realize I was wrong about things.
But I think it's more that, as you said specifically, instead of wanting to go to say a clash concert,
you would want to go here a symphony.
I think that's more cultural and more about just where you are in your life.
It's more just to simplify more of a pleasant evening to go and go to a beautiful concert
homeless and just some beautiful music and have dinner rather than go to a crowded club
and get knocked around by a club and have your ears blown out.
But in terms of the actual music, I wonder how much actually it changes.
I know that people who are young, when they hear things for the first time that they were
never exposed to, someone who may, like Beyonce, but never heard, read the Franklin, suddenly
hears her read the Franklin's, wow, that's amazing.
I think people can like music at any age, it's just more about what their personal needs
are maybe or what they want from it.
And what they're exposed to.
Hi, I'm Rina Kuzerski.
I'm a music supervisor for documentaries.
And what I've been hearing today is two parts.
It's mostly Western music.
It's mostly classical or popular.
A few people have spoken about indigenous music and I think it's important to stress
that in much of indigenous music, both dance and the sound of music go together.
And that tension and release that you spoke about earlier today really has to do with
the tension and release of physical embodiment and physical action.
And when we sit in a concert hall, some people may sit in the back and get rhythmically excited,
but most of us are not allowed to dance or don't, wouldn't even think of it in Carnegie
Hall.
But going to a jazz concert or a rock concert somehow permits you to release that and get
out in the aisle and dance around.
And I think we need to reflect a little bit about how important it is necessary for bodily,
physically to feel the excitement about music.
Hi, very interesting conversation.
My name is Raul Rafael.
I'm an artist, visual artist and also musician.
And music has a very deep scientific basis.
Sematix, which is the study of the patterns that are made through music frequencies, has
shown that sound has an organizing power.
And also there's a very deep metaphysical aspect to music.
We see that in religions throughout the world, throughout history.
Now Dr. Rose, you touched upon, you said the music alleviates the solitude of individuation,
which I think goes to the very core of what communication coming together as one that music
allows.
And I think that has to do a lot with the, I think that Ms. Kren has mentioned the neurophysiological
nature of music.
But also to you mentioned the fact that music creates emotion and emotion in total space,
which is I think at the heart of communication and of the believing of this alienation, this
wanting to come as one, as actually we're doing right now.
I think that human beings want to come together, communicate, commune.
And so could you talk a little bit more about this and possibly this connection between
creating emotion and emotion in total space and the alleviation of the, what did you
say, the alleviation of the solitude of individuation?
Yeah.
I was quoting William James, so I wish I had said it, but he said, I'm old but not that
old.
I want to say only, I thought I wanted to say one thing about it.
No, it just escaped me.
I'm having a senior moment.
Yes.
One thing I could say is that as an analyst, one of the first things an analyst would think
about this is that this at oneness that's created by music, self and other merge, probably
in some very, very dim way, recalls the very earliest moments of life, the very earliest
years of life, which were wordless because language does not yet come.
And this would be the symbiosis of the mother nowadays could be a child relationship.
So on some very, very deep level, now one difference between present analysis and the
analysis that I was brought up on is that we would find far more significance in the present
and recent and cultural contributions rather than me they go back to what do you remember
about being in your mother's arms.
But that doesn't mean that isn't important.
That's the earliest basis of wordless understanding and security and the loss of the sense of
self because you are safe in this what we call holding environment where you're being
held.
I would like to come close to answer your question.
I think that this power of sound, power of frequency and the in sound that in a sense
is not a matter of the formation of matter.
In some early poetry I read someplace that the love song in some culture which I've forgotten
about, the words, the highest form of love you could express would be to say to your
partner, oh I, there is no difference between self and other.
Oh I, it's like pretty narcissistic, but it's the fusion, I'm talking about the fusion,
the oneness.
Hi, my name is Amalia and I have a question about laughter and recorded music.
I was a kid always amused by singers who would just burst out to laughter and as I've gotten
older I realized it wasn't always that funny but more ironic or commentary I'm thinking
of Bill Withers, Hellep and Harlem and he ends the song, ha ha ha, Harlem, you know,
Hellep and Harlem.
So commentary about Harlem and thinking about that.
I haven't fully come up with a conclusion about this laughter and that's why I'm here
to get some thought about what kind of emotion might be, well there's all kind of theories
about why we laugh in general but I'm wondering about unrequarded music and some of your thoughts
about that.
Well I don't know, I just think of this at least, Regina, she's a Brazilian singer, there's
a song where she bursts into laughter in the middle of a line and there's Bob Dylan's
songs, early recordings where he starts laughing and he's responding to his own lyrics laughing
at them.
I mean to me it just always reflects a very natural moment in the music from artists who
are so good that they're so inside the moment of the song and inside the meaning of the
song that it's almost as if they're not singing it themselves and they have almost an objective
sort of reaction to the music but otherwise I never really thought about it that much.
But I have noticed it and I always like it when I hear it.
And the only thing I can say is that the few times I've seen live performances where somebody
has a laugh, that laugh better be good because if it's not good it just destroys the whole
song.
It's got to really be sincere.
So it's a hard thing, that's a very difficult, you know, only a really, I'm sure Bill Weathers
could do it but it's not too many Bill Weathers around.
I'd like to thank the whole panel.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
