Hi, I'm Edner Sessin, Director of the Helix Center.
Before I get going on the subject of pain, which is today's subject, I'd like to make
a couple of announcements about future programs.
On February 25th, we have a program on the displaced and the other.
This seems to be a popular subject.
The European Federation of Psychoanalysis, in fact, have a yearly meeting, and this year
the subject of their whole meeting is the notion of the other.
I think the refugee problem seems to have increased the interest in our reaction to other people.
And so that will be on February 25th, and Bevel is a brisket who is sitting there responsible
and has done a lot of work to organize this.
Then on March 11th, we have the third in the series that we've been doing on music, and
this one is about music and healing.
And then on April 22nd, we will have a program on design in nature.
Today's participants are Abka or Abkarian, who is Professor of Physiology at Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Ina Belfer, who is Health Scientist Administrator,
Project Officer at the Office of Research on Women's Health.
Anisth Dostarevic, correct, is the Assistant Clinical Professor of Anisthesiology and
Pain Medicine at Columbia University.
Alan Fein, sitting here, is the Professor Department of Cell Biology University of Connecticut,
and Rebecca Seil is Assistant Professor of Department of Neurobiology and Otterology and
Center of Pain Research at the University of Pittsburgh.
Thank you.
I told the professor that there's no more waiting, so they just think you start speaking.
Okay.
So we'll start then.
Well, I could start.
Okay.
So I'll just tell you a little bit about myself.
So I'm in the Department of Neurobiology at the University of Pittsburgh, and I'm part
of the Pittsburgh Pain Center, which is one of the few places around the country where
there are a number of both clinicians and basic scientists that come together to interact
about pain in the form of seminars and journal clubs and that kind of thing.
And I really enjoy being at Pittsburgh for that reason, because my background actually
isn't in pain.
I came into pain because I found out something through my research that I thought would have
a huge impact on how we understand pain.
And so that's what I've been following in my lab.
And so most of my focus is on pain circuits.
And while we do have integration with clinical people, I'm really excited to be here today
because any opportunity that I have to learn from other people, clinicians, Dr. Apakaran
who studies the brain.
I'm in this spinal cord mostly, and Ina.
We were colleagues at Pittsburgh who studies the genetics of pain, so I'm really excited
to be here today to learn from them.
Good.
I'll start with an issue.
I will discuss the subjectivity of pain.
It's a classic idea that's been drawn around since Aristotle probably, and Plato.
And it's something we actually are doing some studies on the subject.
And the issue of even how to define pain is the starting point, right?
And the distinction between pain and no-siception and subjectivity of pain and the experience
of pain is something that maybe we can begin with.
And okay, to put some context on the issue, in a recent review article, we have made the
statement that for the most part, all of the research that's been done over the last some
50 or 100 years about pain has concentrated about pain mechanisms, but not properly dissociating
what is no-siception from what is pain.
In fact, there is this continuous mishmash of ideas of if you study the spinal cord,
you're studying pain.
No, I don't think you're studying pain at all.
You're studying some neural phenomena that eventually gives your eyes to pain.
The pain is a subjective state that only the human person can report to me having the pain,
right?
So that's one level of the discussion.
The other half of the discussion is our recent psychophysical experience.
These are classic 18th century psychophysical studies where we, in fact, now look at the
time evolution of humans reporting their pain for thermal stimuli that we put on their skin.
And then from those reports, we actually can generate psychophysical curves.
This is a stimulus response properties.
But from those curves, we can actually derive mathematical models, which now can generalize
the perception of pain to the population in general.
So yes, pain is subjective, but it can be objectified by precise mathematical rules.
So I'll throw that out.
I will take it from here.
There you go.
That's exactly what pain tinnituses do.
So we take something that we call pain that is in the middle from pleasure and suffering
from both hands.
And we know that it is subjective.
We know that it can be somehow object, how you call it?
Make it more objective.
Yes, make it more objective.
And we want to go a little further and see, do we have something that we're born with,
that we can objectively evaluate and then predict the amount of pain after injury or
surgery.
The course of pain doesn't become chronic.
The response to anardisia, the response to surgery if another surgery is needed.
So 15 years ago, when we started the whole field, the idea was it sounded a little crazy,
like how can you genetically approach something that's subjective?
And now 15 years later, we have genetic testing, the test that can objectively evaluate subjective
thing as pain.
So I say that it's all multidisciplinary, interactive, and both subjective, objective.
That's too elastic in a sense.
That's too easy to win.
Go ahead.
I'm sorry.
To me, it's the difference between sensation and perception.
When you talk about notes, like Dr. Seale's studying, you're looking at the sensation
and how that sensation is transmitted through the nervous system to the brain.
Your perception, which has this emotional component, is taking place up here in the
cortical regions.
And so you can study the process as it goes into the nervous system.
And then you need other techniques when you start to talk about perception.
I mean, for me, the perfect example is my grandson, who thinks the music that I listened to is
terrible.
He can't stand opera.
I can't stand what he listens to.
We both, presumably, are hearing the same thing coming into our ears, but each of us
has a completely different perception of what that is.
And so I think the problem gets when you get up here and you get to the perception of pain.
I would just like to defend the idea that the spinal cord is an important for pain in the
sense that I like to think about the pain circuits as being something that's there to
actually help us.
A cute pain everybody knows is required in order to stay healthy.
And I even think some forms of persistent pain, I mean, a lot of people do, are also
there on purpose to help us heal and protect ourselves.
It's only when things become chronic.
I think, you know, it's a problem and also there are good medications for some acute forms
of pain.
So I would like to argue that the neural circuits are there to sense pain and it's a good thing.
The brain is there to modify that and to facilitate it so you can get a lot of changes in the
way that these neural circuits are transmitting the pain through higher cortical function.
That's our new definition.
And I disagree with this position specifically.
That's why we're here to have fun with this discussion.
In a sense, I think we have confused the two issues with each other.
There is no deception, which is always present.
And no deception is how you protect the body from injury.
You don't protect you behind right now because you're feeling pain, but you're protecting
it because no deception naturally evokes behaviors with which before feeling pain you're
not injury your body.
We don't go around injuring our bodies to learn how to not injure our bodies.
So that concept is not correct.
Instead, we have no susceptible signals that intrinsically, subconsciously, are already
protecting the body from injury.
So what is pain then?
Pain is in fact not the protection, but it's the failure of protection.
So that's why it has a negative affective component.
It has a negative component because it's failed behavior and you have to modify behavior
to protect the body once the injury happens.
So there's a subtle difference.
And yes, the classic idea mixes those things together and it's not tenable.
It doesn't make sense.
You don't, again, a very simple idea is that we go around in life most of the time not
having pain and yet our bodies are not injured.
So it's not pain that's protecting us.
It's the nociceptus that are protecting us.
So the pain, in fact, is a cognitive state.
We, I think, all agree on that.
And in fact, you can have pain without spinal cord, you can have pain without a thalamus,
you can have pain without a hemispheres of your brain.
You still have pain.
Pain is a cognitive, emotional, psychological construct that leads consciousness.
Does not necessarily, a priori, it's not, there's no one to one relationship between
nociception and pain.
We should agree on that.
Patients who have pain asymbolia, they indicate that your argument is incorrect.
If you test these patients and they stick their hand out and you give them a painful
stimulus, they go, oh.
That was painful.
They don't do this.
They, you want, can you do it again?
Oh, sure.
Go ahead.
Do it again.
You want to do it again?
Go ahead.
Do it again.
They know it's painful, but there's no emotional component because the part of the brain that
gives them their emotional response has been damaged due to a stroke.
Well, we don't know exactly what's been damaged.
First of all, these asymbolia patients are so few in the literature that, you know, they
exact.
No, I mean, it's an important issue.
What is the exact damage?
And conceptually, we know there's a painful stimulus, but not responding to it and not
calling it pain.
In fact, it's not, it's simply a damage of the brain, right?
The same response can never happen if the damage is in the spinal cord.
So it's not the North's deceptive signal that's necessary for pain.
It's a brain system that can be disrupted, of course, with brain damage.
Its properties will be disrupted.
And depending on the type of disruption, you will get different types of pain asymbolia
or pain abnormalities.
But then to link up with that, how do you explain going from acute pain to chronic or chronic
pain?
And you can't explain it at some point.
What happens with your nociceptive pathways when pain is chronic, but there is no ongoing
injury or trauma or any kind of...
Well, you tell me exactly.
Again, the nociceptive is the one that's falling off.
Your explanation cannot be due to the nociceptive.
The nociceptive does not explain chronic pain.
In fact, our research shows that chronic pain is fundamentally a risk factor of the brain,
not of the nociceptus.
And brain anatomy, brain physiology predicts who's going to develop chronic pain, which
is not.
And in fact, the limbic brain properties are what defines those risk factors.
And the reorganization in time is what creates a chronic pain state.
None of this is a nociceptive explanation.
And this data is quite solid in a sense that we can explain a large amount of the variance
of chronic pain with these parameters.
So if you go back to Ena, then how do we do the genetic testing and predict?
No, absolutely.
We need Ena because all of this has genetic components.
The brain obviously is defined by genes.
The genes and the brain go very much hand in hand.
And we definitely need the genetic component underlying this.
And in fact, we've done a little bit of those trying to link the brain risk factors to
the gene factors and how there's a lot more to be done.
We're at the beginning of that game, in a sense.
So basically what Vanya said, yes, you have to have brain to feel pain.
On the other hand, there are basic mechanisms, including genetic mechanisms, that can predict,
explain, and predispose to more or less of the component inside this experience of pain.
Of course, the brain is at the end of the day has a big genetic component, right?
And it defines those properties.
How much of it is genetic?
How much of it is that?
We don't know.
We haven't done the studies yet.
So what is genetic?
I mean, everything is genetic, but I mean in terms of pain, what is it that you are qualified?
So right now we say that there are common genetic factors that contribute to pain in different
conditions across the diseases.
And possibly this is what you call nociception or what you call the circuses.
And then there is disease or condition specific genetics.
And what is interesting with the chronic pain specifically, now we come to this new era
when you can have unbiased approach to study genetics.
And the more genetic factors you consider within the disease, the more variability can
be predicted or explained with genetics.
And one of the, it's still unpublished data, but one of the examples was this exercise
that was done with the orophacial pain in the patients with TMJ disorder.
When the data was analyzed in the certain experiment with under 2,000 people, so this
is not a huge genetic experience.
For the clinical trials, it's huge for genetic studies.
It's modest size.
When we got the genetic data and we had the statistical value of specific genetic polymorphisms,
and we took 10 top genetic factors, almost nothing could be explained in terms of overall
variability in pain within these under 2,000 people with the certain condition.
If, besides genetic, we consider only one non-genetic thing such as sex.
All of a sudden we can explain 8% of variability in this particular condition, in this particular
sample, 8%.
But then we started adding more and more genetic factors, taking more and more polymorphisms
with p-values or significant levels, not very impressive, but still top all of the sudden
we could explain more and more of this variability.
And the exercise stopped when 3,000 individual polymorphisms from millions of other factors
considered, all of the sudden the overall variability was 42%, from 8% with sex only, to 42 where
sex was considered with genetic factors.
Do we know what does that mean?
Not yet.
This is only the first step.
Now we can go back and then we will need all your studies because then we need to go from
genetic polymorphism to the molecular to the pathway to the specific things that were different
in this patient compared to other patients.
So if I understood correctly, is it talking about genetic predisposition to have chronic pain?
Chronic pain.
Right.
And that's just a pure genetic makeup.
Is it genetic or versus epigenetic?
Or how do you take it from there?
Not versus.
So the beauty of the genetic, pure genetic without AP component is that we can evaluate
it at any time point because we've born that and it doesn't change.
And if we have a big sample we can do it instead of candidate genes, we can do all genes together.
So the genetic, study genetic makeup of the condition using big samples of patients is a
great step forward, but not the only step.
Then we go to what was done just in addition to the genetics and then we can take other
stuff like epigenetic, what a certain pollution was it, toxic environments.
We can study the environment around those populations and those that can bring those changes that
in the epigenome, something that regulates expression of the genes besides the genetic makeup.
So the sequence of the DNA the same, the expression of the genes is different.
Then we come to the lifestyle, this is pure psychology, lifestyle and beliefs and cultural
and religious and all other habits.
Then we come to demographic and it's not only sex or gender, it's also race and ethnic background.
It's also age and huge differences that come with age across the lifespan.
Then we come to body mass index, then we come to the smoking and alcoholism and all those
factors and they're all on the border of how much they were genetically predicted in this
particular individual or how much it was already nurtured by the environment.
One question for you, how do you deal with chronic pain caused by different
conditions that people may have experienced, like chronic pain of different ideologies?
The idea is that chronic pain itself is a disease.
It can be triggered by different factors, it can be triggered by different, but this is
the disease, this is the condition.
So the genetic makeup or epigenetic changes may be uniform across the conditions.
So you're assuming that it doesn't matter what caused the chronic pain?
Let me actually give you a concrete study that we actually have done.
This is studying subjects, we recruited about 100 patients who had acute back pain and then
we followed these patients for three years until they become either chronic pain patients
or they become healthy subjects and there is only one study of the sorts and this was
we spent about six, seven years doing this study.
All of these patients were studied with brain imaging from weeks after they developed
an acute back pain and continue to study them for over three years.
By design, they all entered the study essentially with the same duration and the same intensity
of pain and the same etiology, they all have back pain, acute back pain essentially.
And by luck, a year or three years later, 50% of them continue to have exactly the same
pain that they started with while the other 50% don't have pain, they recover, they're
healthy, they're happy.
And then the question is what happened to these subjects?
What we can see first of all is that their brain anatomy and their brain physiology only
of the people who persist in having pain is continuously changing.
Moreover, their brain anatomy and brain physiology at time zero, just at the time when they
enroll into the study, predicts by about somewhere between 60 to 90% corrects who will develop
chronic pain versus who will not.
One year or up to three years later and these are the limbic brain properties.
Basically, if we simply take the volume of the hippocampus and their amygdala, the connectivity
of the hippocampus and their amygdala to the frontal cortex, to the nucleus accumbens,
all of these parameters simply predict one year later who will have chronic pain and who will not.
So you are saying, if I understand you, then I guess it's connected to your comments about
no reception, that the chronic pain has no connection to any etiologic factors.
No, no, no, I didn't say that.
But they all end up with some injury that provokes the condition.
But some people are at risk, at a priori or at risk to becoming chronic pain patients
and others are not.
They all have the same injury approximately, they all have the same duration and location
and intensity of pain at time zero.
And yet, half of them recover, the other half don't.
And that difference is a brain phenomena.
And that brain phenomena also has to be a genetic phenomena, at least in parts.
So if you were to examine these patients who continue to have chronic pain
and compare their MRIs with MRIs and patients who don't have chronic pain, the MRIs are the same.
Not a few years later, they have changed.
The brain of the person who is developing chronic pain is continuously changing.
I'm not talking about the brain, I'm talking about the back.
The back?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, and the back is going to be, we haven't even bothered looking at the back.
The MRI of the back has been done for 50 years.
It explains 1% of the variance of chronic pain.
It has no explanatory value, it has never worked.
That's what I was asking.
What you are saying is that the actual condition of the back has nothing to do with chronic pain.
Well, it has not so far, no one has been able to come up with any serious variance being explained
by any of the millions of MRIs that have been done on the back.
They don't explain the condition.
And yet, we keep doing it, but that's another issue, I guess.
The surgery is not the big factor in any chronic pain condition that after surgery.
We did experience with little surgeries such as hernia repair.
Such a tiny thing, and still there is hernia repair.
So, it's not the major surgery, but still there are certain, at least 10 to 20% who end up with chronic pain
after this tiny surgery, but also more uniform techniques in big surgery such as breast surgery
where the protocols are well-defined.
And the surgical experience is pretty much uniform.
And yet, 47% of women have chronic pain after mastectomy at some degree, at some kind or type.
And so the surgery itself, this is something that we have, but it's not explaining a big part of variability
and cannot predict who is going to develop what.
As a doctor, if I saw somebody who had hernia surgery and who continued to have pain,
I would be automatically assuming, based on my ancient training of 50 years ago or 40 years ago,
that there must be something locally present that is continuing to cause that pain.
The same thing would apply if I were talking about someone with back pain.
I think what you are saying is that's not the case.
That's not the case.
I mean, a little bit on the clinical aspect, it is, and it's not the case from what I can tell you
from what I've been observing.
There are no risk factors for pain after surgery.
And apparently, surgery can contribute 20-something percent as a cause of chronic pain.
And the top major...
But that number keeps decreasing, or it increases.
Not really, it's been...
At least according to the studies, they've been looking into the last 25 years or so.
It's been steady, must act to me, hernia repair, thoracic surgeries, amputation surgeries.
Those are like, you know, big offenders as opposed to like other surgeries.
So those are one of the risk factors.
The other big risk factor is how much pain somebody has right after surgery.
So it's the response to surgery and the acute surgical pain.
The worse surgical pain is, or lasting longer, there's a higher risk factors for chronic pain.
Having pain before surgery is another risk factor, known risk factor at the place of surgery or elsewhere.
Somebody who has chronic headache, severe chronic headache, going into surgery as a high risk of having pain after surgery,
and is somebody who doesn't.
Type of surgery, it does contribute.
Failback surgery syndrome is one of the main contributors to chronic pain after surgery.
It has to do with how many surgeries somebody has had.
If somebody has five back surgeries, they're high risk of having chronic pain, then somebody who just had one surgery.
So those factors are known.
But those factors, in fact, if you actually look how much they really contribute to the outcome,
then each one of them is a tiny amount of variance.
But how do you know that?
From the literature, that's what I know.
That's really what the numbers show.
Every one of these factors is a tiny amount.
What I'm saying is, if I simply look at the volume of the amygdala, I can explain 50% of the variance.
50%.
That's a massive number.
That's not something to sort of ignore and say, well, you know, I have another 2% here and another, I have 5% there.
And if I add them up, maybe I can...
So, yes, I don't...
Of course, no seception is part of pain perception.
I'm not going to sit here and say there is no no seception.
Of course, no seceptive drive is part of the system.
But the critical part that at least what I believe nowadays is that how that no seception is transferred into pain by the brain is the critical transformation which changes the formula.
So, the same no seceptor may be painful or maybe not painful and that difference by and large, at least in our hands, is driven by the brain.
That's all I'm saying.
You need to replicate that in a whole bunch of different chronic pain states.
Oh, absolutely.
And in fact, NIH has multiple studies ongoing to replicate those results.
So, then if somebody has a, let's say, brain predisposition to have chronic pain, you can remove all these other factors and the naked still develop chronic pain.
More so than other folks, you know, that...
Absolutely.
We have not, in fact, we use all of those factors as confounds.
We take them away before we create the model.
So, we've in fact, you know, taken those variables out and then, looking at what the brain is contributing to these effects.
We're going to deal with causal versus correlation.
Aha.
Well, that's a very good question.
And I asked him how he deals with causal versus correlation.
So, that's a great question.
And causality, the strongest answer to for dissociating causality from correlation is being able to predict the future.
Okay?
Future is not a correlation.
Future is causality.
So, if I can predict what you will do tomorrow, I'm already coming up with a mechanism that has...
That you have this simplest concept of causality is predicting the future.
So, that's why I'm discussing, you know, if I have parameters today that can tell me two years, three years down the line,
how this subject will behave, you have to give me a credit that I'm talking something having to do with causality.
It's not correlation anymore.
So, now that brings out a whole other bag of works that we can discuss, like free will and, you know,
having determining your own destiny and who I am as a self, but the data in a sense is still...
Maybe it would be interesting to hear from you about...
I don't know, I'm having trouble with this, but thank you.
Maybe it would be interesting for people to hear from you about the current thoughts on, you know, these brain signatures of pain that you're talking about.
I won't argue that the pain, that, you know, brain is important for the pain and you can't feel pain without the brain and that kind of thing.
So, I don't want people to get confused with my view here on just, you know, just to restate my point is that, you know,
you take information in from the environment, from internal organs that is no-susceptive and it gets transferred into pain.
I consider that whole process to be pain. I mean, just to be simple about it.
But in the brain...
No, not simple. Let's be complex, please.
In the brain, all of these regions that he's talking about that are involved in pain, people have considered this the pain matrix.
And what it turns out is that, you know, these, I mean, of course, it's obvious many of these brain areas are used for other things.
Like, you know, anxiety and, you know, various emotions.
And anyway, maybe you could talk a little bit about, you know, when you're talking about...
The specificity of the way it's signatures, is that what...
Of course, maybe you can just explain when you're talking about the amygdala and this and how those are interacting.
And that gives you the ability to predict the future.
Yeah, so that's far into... So, there is pure experimental observation, which is, I have a parameter that predicts outcome.
Then the question is, what is pain perception in the brain? That's a much more complex question.
I don't pretend to have answered that question.
What I'm saying is I can find mechanisms predicting of outcome.
I did not explain what perception of pain is.
The perception of pain is a complex brain state, which we are all working on.
And there is a lot of excitement in the field and lots of people throwing mud at each other, which is great, which is how you work progress.
But that fact does not have any other bearing to the fact that if I simply measure the amygdala or the hippocampus volume,
and I use that as a risk factor, it predicts the long term outcome of the pain state.
I did not explain the pain by this. This is simply a risk factor.
In a sense, these circuitry are involved in the process of transition from acute to chronic pain.
And this is exactly what we and now multiple other groups are doing, looking at the brain circuitry,
organizing in time in animal models, following an injury, the synaptic reorganization,
there is cellular reorganization across many brain areas, including the nucleus accumbens, the medial prefrontal cortex, the hippocampus, the amygdala,
and the vector segmental area.
These are all brain areas that we now have animal data, showing that they are changing in time, their synaptic properties, their information exchange across them,
within days after a peripheral injury. And in a sense, it would be very hard for me to say that all of these things are because of the nociceptor.
That's the only thing I'm saying. There is a whole brain reorganization that happens in the transition of chronic pain.
The details remain... Well, what causes the brain?
Well, again, the details we don't know. Of course, the injury is part of it. We have to have the injury.
And the most deceptive signal has to be in there. I'm not denying that the most deceptive signal has to be there.
But that's an initial drive. But these regions, by changing in their properties, they shift the organism into a new state.
And I think that's the chronic pain state.
There are a number of European studies where they can actually go in and do experiments on patients.
And what they've shown is that a number of these patients who are experiencing neuropathic pain, if they go in and they selectively anesthetize the nerves that would be sending signals, say, from the leg back to the brain,
they anesthetize those nerves. The patient's pain goes away.
So the evidence is that there is an ongoing signal coming along from the nociceptors up to the brain.
And these people are experiencing chronic pain patients for a number of different mechanisms for how they develop that chronic pain.
I agree. I don't have any problems with this.
But that signal is going, it's not that it came at the beginning and they became chronic pain. They still have a signal coming.
So there's a signal coming to their brain and that's what's causing them to have the pain.
I don't know. The last sentence is not necessary.
The anesthetize. The causality that you created was not necessarily two.
So the better test of causality is block the signal.
You block the signal with Novocaine, whatever they're using to block the nerve from conducting action potentials to the brain.
They stop conducting. The pain goes away. The patients are awake.
They ask them, the pain goes away. And then as the medication wears off, the patient recovers and the pain comes back.
These experiments are on live functioning human beings.
In a number of situations, there are a number of chronic pain situations that are treated by Novocaine patches.
And they're probably working the exact same way. They're blocking the nerve from sending a signal back to the brain and causing pain.
So there's a few theories for that. The theory is partially, I believe, clinically true.
But the problem is if we can maintain this block for a long period of time, perhaps we would be able to block the transition from acute to chronic pain.
But that's just practically not really feasible. And why is that?
Because the healing process takes days. Takes a long, long, long time.
And any point during this healing process, sensitization can occur.
And I'm talking about this concept of sensual sensitization, which is responsible to some extent to development of chronic pain.
So it means we have an injury. There's inflammatory processes going on the side of injury, which triggers peripheral sensitization.
So the area is red. It's swollen. It hurts. And whatnot.
There's some signals going to the spinal cord and to the brain. But eventually the brain and the organism kicks in and fights the pain and inflammation process.
And eventually things calm down and the pain goes away. That's part of the healing process.
But because of various risk factors, maybe limbic system and in a previous position could be one of those.
Or if there's an ongoing barrage of painful signals coming from the periphery, we end up sensitizing the spinal cord.
And then there's a whole bunch of other processes happening. And this can happen a day after surgery, two days after injury, three, four, five, ten days, fifteen days even.
And the reason why this is a hypothesis is that we can do these blocks.
We can apply local anesthetic blocks and keep the area numb for two, three days. And people can still develop chronic pain five months later.
So there's something else that we're not quite catching there. Some moment of time could be ten days perhaps up to surgery.
Hence we have this concept of preventive analgesia where we try to cover from before the surgery or impact or injury to some period of time afterwards
and see if we can capture the entire process of sensitization and then prevent this chronic pain from happening.
So, I mean, I take the point very seriously. This is an issue that is due to my work. And it's an important question.
And I absolutely believe that data that's been published. And I know the people who have published the papers are their good friends.
And I think that's the question. The question is what is really happening? And in a sense that you have a noreceptive signal
and when you stop the noreceptive signal, yes, it looks like the pain goes away. The question is, where did the switch happen from that noreceptive signal being a transient event to being a long-term event?
And the idea, the simple idea that we have put forward is that the limbic brain is interpreting the noreceptive signal
so that its properties are changing in a sense that a single action potential of noreceptive action potential, which in a healthy subject you would simply ignore and not feel pain with it, now is interpreted as pain.
So, yes, the noreceptive signal is there. The question is, how is that noreceptive signal being interpreted?
Was it subconscious? Was it conscious? Or how much of it has invaded by consciousness? Is in a sense, you know, my hand-waving interpretation of our data given the role of noreceptive, they have to play within it?
I don't know, is that? I'm curious. That's your work. I mean, there's a whole slew of people, Dr. Seel, who are studying, but they're not looking up here in the cortical regions, they're looking in the spinal cord for where this occurs.
And there's a lot of evidence that it occurs in the spinal cord. Yes and no. I mean, yes, there is evidence, of course, there's central sensitization.
Max classic Clifford Wolf has done it. We have 30 years of data on the subject. But central sensitization happens with a sunburn.
No one develops chronic pain from sunburn. So, and it's, you know, and in fact, if you look at the noreceptive signal coming into the spinal cord, recent data from Cheryl Stokke, looking at arthritis models of pain, in fact, the noreceptive signal seems to go down after the injury,
while the animal is now exhibiting more pain. So, the correlation, even the correlation between the noreceptive signal and chronic pain has remained mostly fate, and it has, that the evidence is not very clean.
Although there's a huge amount of work on the subject. Yes, please.
At this point in time, the way that I view it is, you know, what he's talking about essentially is you have an injury, and then it goes through different stages like you guys were talking about where there's sensitization at the periphery, sensitization in the spinal cord.
And then ultimately, you know, I think what he's referring to is in a chronic pain state, you could end up with a situation where the pain is mainly, you know, the plasticity has happened in the brain.
And so, what I think he's talking about is, and what we've been talking about is really the time course of the pain, and how the pain moves, so to speak, through the system. And so, you know, is the spinal cord important for pain becoming chronic?
Probably. I mean, it's hard to imagine that it wouldn't be. It's, you know, the pathway that it takes.
But at some point, does it become independent of that? You know, that's possible in some conditions. I mean, the other thing is not, you know, you can't really, this is something that my lab is really interested in, that I was telling them before, is you can't, my belief is you can't equate different kinds of pain.
You know, if you have diabetic neuropathy, if you have, you know, post-surgical pain, if you have cancer pain, these are all, you know, inflammatory pain like arthritis.
These are all different pains that manifest differently, and have different neural circuits, and need to be treated differently.
And whether they all end up in one place in the brain, if they remain chronic, I can't actually speak to that. But I know that in our studies, we don't see the same circuits involved in these different types of pain. They're different circuits.
I agree with you.
And that comes to treatment. And if you're going to get treated, you need to be treated for the kind of pain that you have. And I think a lot of people do take that into account.
But, you know, that's the direction that we're interested in.
No, I agree. We've published a whole series of studies looking at brain activity for different chronic pain conditions. And each one of them, we show its own signature.
The signatures are unique. But of course, there's also a lot of overlap between them. And exactly what that shows us, I'm not quite sure, in a sense that, you know, behaviorally, these patients have different behaviors.
You know, an archdiast patient is not the same as a headache patient. Obviously, even their daily behavior is different. So living with these conditions will end up with a different unique brain signature to start with.
And yet also, they have a lot of overlap between them, too. So I don't have the answer about the uniqueness versus the convergence of representation of perception.
I'm just talking more about the risk factors of getting into that state. And also, there's really nice new data showing how many brain circuitry are reorganizing in these animal models, which we did not know a few years ago.
So if I may just add a little bit to that, to expand. And what we're talking about is very interesting concept. There's a concept also of condition pain modulation.
So there's a setup in the brain to begin with that helps our body and our organism deal with pain. And everybody has a different condition pain modulation.
That's how much you can tolerate pain. And genetics can also, I'm sure, reveal that. And what's your threshold for pain? What's your pain sensitivity?
Suddenly, that kind of ties into the limbic system. But certainly, there's also a change that happened after we exposed to acute to chronic pain as well.
But there is a predisposition from the get-go, from the higher brain centers that regulate the response to pain through this condition pain modulation.
But I think they also involved all the other downstream pathways, because one of the mechanisms, or one of the therapies that we use for chronic pain, is spinal cord stimulation.
Which is basically applying the electrical stimulation, the spinal cord area, triggering...
Is that the perspective of the ecology of the pain?
Well, there are some differences. I mean, it's not really used for any chronic pain state, but the neuralgia, chronic nerve type of pain, or other types of more complex pain states have been managed with the spinal cord stimulation.
Or even peripheral nerve stimulation. But the theory is that we're activating certain pathways in the spinal cord area, which then travel to the brain and cause reorganization in the brain structures, based on certainans and norepinephrine.
Because as we know, depression, anxiety, catastrophizing, those are risk factors for developing chronic pain. And they have to do with levels of neurotransmitters in the brain, how much we can make and how much we can use them.
So there's definitely that aspect as well. So I don't know how that ties into the limbic system from the get-go and then development of these changes, corticone.
We really don't know what spinal cord stimulation is really doing. And for many, many years, you know, evidence keeps accumulating for spinal cord stimulation for its efficacy.
On the other hand, its efficacy is amazingly counterbalanced with the lack of any new therapeutic drugs, for example, that we have not been able to develop from 50 years of studying peripheral neurosis,
peripheral neurosusceptors, and spinal cord circuitry. We know that circuitry probably better than any other circuitry in the brain. We know every neurotransmitter and every synapse in that spinal cord.
And yet, we don't have a single drug that has come out of it successfully. So there is a real gap in that approach that has not paid off.
You know, I'm waiting for you. It's not quite true that they have developed drugs.
And the problem is when you bring those drugs to humans, you discover that they have significant side effects, and therefore they can't be used.
But that doesn't mean that they haven't, from the basic science, gone and developed drugs that are analgesic, but they can't use them because they have significant side effects.
Well, I mean, the classic example is T-V-1, right? That's that.
That's exactly one. There are numerous pharmaceutical companies that have developed drugs to give analgesia. Those drugs work.
And in humans, they call it hyper... They only do that. They cause hypothermia, and that's a serious side effect, and that's stopped them from being used clinically.
That's a perfect example. There are drugs, there are antibodies that are used for treating chronic arthritis in the knee, and those drugs work.
But they also cause significant side effects. A significant fraction of the people getting them have to go out and have complete knee replacement.
Well, the anti-NGF looks like it's going to be a successful drug, which will be the first one.
But the thing that keeps these drugs from being used are the side effects.
Yeah, they're cool. I think exciting developments on that front. One of them is this new concept. I don't know how new it is, but there's some recent data that suggests that you can get synergy by combining some of the opioids for the door.
Delta opioid receptor and new opioid receptor. So you can use 100-fold less drug than you would have before, and that seems promising.
And the other thing that's happening is people are starting to understand better.
When you take opioids, you have these side effects like constipation, or the obvious problem with drug addiction, and people are starting to take apart these different, let's say, pathways that the opioids, when they activate the receptors, there's the anti-nosticeptive aspect, and then there's these side effects, and they're starting to be able to break that down so they can just target
one without getting the others. So I think that's an exciting development.
Yeah, I don't know if it's validated or not, that opioids over a period of time, in fact, increase pain.
Yeah, fractional.
And so is that something like that would support your position?
No, in fact, we have a very large grant proposal that's sitting at NIH to specifically answer that question.
We will know the whether we will get funded in the next few months or so, and then we have a five-year project along those lines.
So the data is not really there, but in a sense, the opiate circuitry is very much, of course, a limbic involvement.
And so given that the limbic circuitry, now we know there's plenty of data from many different labs
that within days after an injury starts reorganizing, exactly how opiates are now acting within that circuitry,
and its sub-components of the receptor types and all of that.
It's all open, we don't know the answer, the science has not been done.
But do we know when opioids are helping pain, what is the, where are they acting on?
Well, the classic assumption is that it's the mu-opiates in the peri-acro-doctorate and descending modulation in the spinal cord.
That's the standard line, but opiates act in the reward circuitry, and the reward circuitry is the main,
we think is a main risk factor for developing chronic pain.
So that circuitry is changing in time, and these, they are studies that are just beginning to happen,
but the data is still very young.
A couple of years ago with genetic studies, we found that there is a particular genetic mutation in u-opiate receptor
that encodes a very different type of reception, u-opiate reception,
and it is structurally very different. Instead of seven transmembran, it has only six transmembran.
And at least in animals, we have a hope that these may explain why certain people develop these hyperalgesia
or other side effects to the same opiates, and the variance of this particular mutation is somewhat the same range
as the proportion of people who have this atypical response to opiates.
So it's right now equal possibility that it may be explained by what one is talking about,
or it may be a different, structurally different receptor per se, so everything is different in response to opiates
in those patients who are unfortunate to having two copies of this mutation.
So these are all very amazing concepts, but we also have to keep in mind there's different types of pain as we mentioned,
and opiates only work on one type of pain.
There's pure nociceptotype of pain.
As inflammatory opiates don't really tend to work great on inflammatory pain, or neuropathic pain.
Opiates are not great medications for neuropathic pain, visceral pain as well.
So what we are talking about is opiates induce hyperalgesia.
It's a phenomenon, it's very interesting, but we don't only have a good grasp of that.
It kind of goes along with tolerance, and some people that take opiates for a period of time develop tolerance
to the effect of opiates, which means they might require increasing dose to have the same effect.
While people that have opiates hyperalgesia develop more pain, and adding more opiates actually makes the pain worse.
But the whole concept of what really triggers the hyperalgesia is very interesting, but it's really unknown.
But the good point is that opiates are just there, part of our pain fighting kind of therapies or strategies that we have.
And they're really good to some extent for acute pain, but not so much for chronic pain.
Because chronic pain is completely different, long game.
But what would they imagine with anything chronic that there would be changes in the brain?
So is that you are saying something more than that?
What I'm saying is there are changes, and we think the changes, in a sense, the changes differentiate subjects who become healthy,
where we don't see any changes.
So the unexpected result, you would think that they were diverging, they would show similar or complementary results.
No, the ones who recover and are normal don't show any changes.
Only the ones who persist on becoming, who persist with the pain, first of all, their whole brain, grey matter, volume decreases.
There's a whole brain volume decrease, not, and that volume decrease is specific to specific brain areas.
We can actually show three or four brain areas where the density of the cortical grey matter is decreasing in time.
And that decrease is in fact also directly related to the functional connectivity of those areas as well.
So functional anatomical properties of the brain are changing in time, and yes, we define that as creating the chronic pain brain in a sense,
whether how much of that is basically a consequence of living with the condition versus an actual causally, it's hard to dissociate.
But we see the effects very early on, so within six weeks after the first brain scan, six weeks later there are already specific brain changes,
and those continue to happen over, in fact, years to come.
And so that's in a sense, we think of it as the adaptation of the brain and creation of the brain of being its chronic state.
And basically the very simple idea that all of this that we have pushed forward is that the brain is becoming addicted to nociception.
So yes, nociception is important.
In fact, the brain is exaggerating the interpretation of that nociception into continuous pain as opposed to interwetal pain, let's say.
So that's a simplistic idea, I don't have to prove for it, but that's a concept that we can sort of play with.
And the relevance of it is in terms of treatment.
Treatment mechanisms and specific circuitry, right, and in and along those lines we actually have a clinical trial,
specifically on with this idea.
Basically, we also have in animal models, we show that dopamine that has something to do with addiction in a sense, right,
dopamine concentration in the brain drops by 50% within days after a peripheral nerve injury.
And if we give these animals dopamine back, we show amazing pain relief.
So we actually have a clinical trial in humans trying to see if we can use this concept to stop the transition from an initial injury to long-term chronic qualification.
And it's an ongoing study, I don't know the results.
Just to go back to interesting, you know what you're saying with these changes that happen with chronic pain,
but there's also studies looking into reversal of these changes with successful management.
So it's a great concept too, so sometimes it's not really irreversible changes that...
We don't know how much of it is reversible, and certainly some of it is reversible, there's no question about that, which is nice.
But there's hope.
Absolutely, yes. Yeah, no, I think in fact, I mean, we are very excited.
I think in a sense, all of a sudden, there are many different directions with which we can actually try to come up with novel approaches to therapy.
I mean, brain regions that was never thought to be part of pain, all of a sudden they all probably helped the circuitry.
And so they all fail game in that sense.
I think the concept that brain is changing as a result of chronic pain, it's interesting, but it's also...
The reversal is also interesting that if we can reverse those changes and then regenerate those changes back,
and that's absolutely possible, because we do have new genes that are getting turned on in chronic pain states.
They were not active before.
So if there's a way to turn them on, there's probably a way to turn them back off.
Exactly.
And that's where new genes that can deal with that too.
Absolutely.
Meditation, for example, apparently it's been shown that chronic pain, meditation, brain changes, folks that do practice meditation on the radio basically.
Manipulation sleep is another one.
Or epigenetics.
Or it's because of that.
So epigenetics comes with things like meditation, mouthfulness, therapies, sleep manipulation, mood manipulation, all those.
And the phenotypes that you described with this condition pain evaluation, that may be a surrogate to the brain events that Vanya describes.
So you can... because you know, we know that MRI is not a very cheap technique.
So we can maybe avoid it by evaluating those phenotypes like with quantitative sensory testing.
When we assess the ability of the whole system to respond to no-susception with endogenous inhibitory mechanisms, and we can assess it without fMRI with very simple protocols.
And they may be reflecting those brain changes that are totally plastic, and we can manipulate those.
Are we on the same grant?
Do we have this experiment?
No, I'm not grants.
I'm not...
No, you're not.
You're not.
But to put this in a critical perspective while all this is important, besides being fascinating, is if we can find a way to perhaps try to track down and find folks that might be at higher risk for the whole system.
And maybe at higher risk for developing chronic pain, is there a way to kind of apply more therapies and more modalities to try to prevent that from happening?
Including your blocks.
The whole idea of genetic testing is, can we know a priori to the big manipulation, management, surgery, whatever, who is at risk and we have to do something specific, like additional blocks during the pandemic.
And then you have to do some of the other blocks during the surgery to try to avoid these pathological circles that goes to Vanya's changes.
Yes.
And why is this important?
Because not everybody who's having surgery ends up developing chronic pain, right?
Some people do, but we have all different sorts of analgesic, anesthetic and other kind of options to deal with pain during surgery, but not everybody needs those.
So if we can identify who is at higher risk, and then we can apply perhaps more of something that's called multimodal, covering different pain pathways, different nociceptive pathways, perhaps a little bit better, hoping that they won't end up developing pain.
And as opposed to somebody who might have low risk for developing pain, based on genetics or testing, sensory testing, pinprick testing, people have different sensitivity to different painful sensations.
So, I mean exactly along those lines, so we actually have again, I'm sorry, I'm brain centric, and I will end up going back to the brain, but we actually have a model from our studies that calculates the risk for chronic pain.
And this clinical trial that we're doing right now, we don't treat people who are at low risk, and we only treat people who are at high risk.
In a sense, this is a validation step to just see whether our model generalizes to a new population, and we don't know, but a third of the patients who entered the study are not given anything.
We say, oh, just wait, just wait, we have to decide what to do with you, but we're hoping that their pain will just go away spontaneously without having us to do anything, based on our risk assessment on them.
So, but I thought there are no accepted ways of treating people to avoid chronic pain.
Well, so again, this is a novel drug combination that we are testing for the first time. We've shown this drug combination to be effective in animal models.
We've published this recently, and this is interesting bear with me for a second, because we actually try, we give these subjects both NSAIDs, the standard line of treatment for patients who are in pain, as well as dopamine.
And in, at least in our animal model, when we give the two together, the animals essentially, for weeks, don't show any pain behavior.
When we give either one of them by itself, they have very little effect.
So, the concept here is that we are trying to stop the brain from becoming addicted to the pain by the dopamine that we give them.
At the same time, decreasing the non-ceceptive signal from the periphery, and we don't know if it will work in humans or not,
you know, the study is blinded and it's ongoing.
But the whole idea is that you can't apply the same approach to everyone.
No, I don't.
Because this, this, what we, when we talk about individualized, personalized precision, it's all coming back from this general idea that you can't have the magic pill that will work exactly, identically, in, in every patient with pain is just drawn.
And now we know why, because of all those phenomena that we just described.
So, we try to know who is going to respond better to what, and we're talking about type of, of pain management, those of the pain killer, or whatever it is.
So, is this going to have an impact on anesthesia?
You're going to be able to tell ahead of time how much a person needs anesthesia before surgery?
Well, I think so.
Well, I mean, not just that.
They could all get anesthesia before surgery, I think.
That's a good concept.
And also to link up on that, I mean, we'll be doing testing where we can get a genetic makeup of everyone and basically figure out if they have tolerance to certain medications or sensitivity side effects.
So, typical example, not everybody likes opioids and some people have different, you know, liking on different opioids.
And, and we as, as of now, basically just go by whatever they tell us experience or trial and error.
But yeah, I mean, we will be able to tell how much somebody needs and tailor it a little bit properly, medication-wise and the amount-wise, too.
I mean, along those lines, I think there's data brought from our study and from the NIH ongoing study for pelvic pain population, at least that there's good evidence that we should be able to identify for each chronic pain patient.
What is maybe not today, but down the line, we have the tools to do it.
Who will respond to which kind of treatment?
In a sense, all the treatments that we have are effective in one third of the population and they decrease one third of their pain.
On the other hand, if we match them properly, I think we would have a much better outcome because we randomly are giving them any drug that comes to the, to the hand of the physician, not having any information.
But we and multiple other studies have now shown that there is specific subject efficacy based on brain anatomy and brain function as to what treatment a given subject will respond to.
Before we stop, I would like you just to say something because I hadn't heard of it before about phantom breast pain and nipple pain following mastectomy.
Because I had not heard of phantom, only heard of phantom limb.
Phantom pain is a mystery and is a mystery phenomenon and this is like a perfect example of how much brain is involved because phantom pain is literally everything happening in brain only.
And so we were looking at the link between neurological diseases such as epilepsy and chronic pain disorders and we tried to see the model where the pain cannot be triggered from the periphery anymore.
And so we wanted to see this phantom pain as an example of such a pain. And everybody knows that some people develop phantom pain after amputation of their limb.
But apparently it's not just in the limb, it's in any organ that is amputated.
And one of the most frequent cancer surgeries in United States female population is breast cancer.
And many of post mastectomy women develop neuropathic painful conditions. One of the types of these conditions is phantom pain.
It could be phantom breast or phantom nipple.
And it's also the great example of how pain may be part of the phenomenon but not entirely.
So with phantom nipple for example, pain is not the major destructive thing. It's all about other sensations.
So with phantom breast pain is one of the major complaints.
And this is one of the most challenging conditions as any neuropathic pain condition for treatment where all alternative and other multi-model approaches would be the first choice
because mono model therapy just doesn't work.
And there are interesting techniques that our brain comes with. And I was telling this morning that we had a patient who had phantom limb.
And he said that pain itself, he can live with that. But there are things that drive him crazy.
One of them is that he has a feeling that one finger on his missing foot going up another finger.
And that drives him crazy. So he himself developed a technique to deal with this type of sensation by coming to the mirror with his prosthetic leg.
And putting his fingers on the phantom, yes, trying and looking at the mirror and his brain somehow accepted this manipulation.
And that gave him relief from this. So pain is a mystery thing. It's all in brain.
And we can do interesting things manipulating this brain, fighting, suffering that is the part of this pain perception.
Thank you. Let me give you one more. Are we done?
We can go on retraining the brain.
Retraining the brain.
To deal with the pain. Hence regenerating. Same similar concept, spinal cord injury or post stroke injury.
We are retraining the body. And the more we can retrain, we can reestablish the healthy circuits, the better off folks might be.
That's the mirror therapy where you're trying to basically tell your brain it's okay.
Till the brain is able on its own to kind of assume that there's no issue going on there anymore.
Like smiling when you're depressed, go and smile. And somehow it manipulates the brain. And maybe with this technique.
There's something also very specifically different about chronic pain.
And this is, you know, we have been looking at information sharing in the brain in these chronic pain patients.
And what is amazing is that if you look at how much information is shared in the brain, we can come up with an approximate rule of how that information is shared in healthy subjects.
When we look at chronic pain patients, there is a massive decrease of this information sharing.
And the amount of decrease seems to be proportional to the amount of pain that they have.
And that decrease is everywhere in the brain.
In a sense that the chronic pain affects information processing everywhere in the brain.
And we can only find this in the chronic pain patients, but if we give them an acute painful stimulus of the same intensity, nothing like this happens.
So there is an actual interference of conscious processing that subjects are doing, that they are unable to process by simply having living with this massive negative state of being, that's in a sense.
Okay. Any questions?
What do we know about patients who are either spontaneously improved or are cured of chronic pain?
I mean, I'm thinking, for example, we mentioned retraining.
What about stroke patients, right, who improved?
Those who suffer stroke after, they have chronic pain.
And what about those patients where we do not see an etiology, with therapeutic etiology?
I don't know. The clinician should answer. I don't know. I mean, it's a very, very event. I don't see them.
But I'm not looking for them either, right?
What I'm suggesting is that it may be worthwhile to look at that.
Yeah, but how long do I wait until they get better?
I'm not suggesting that what you should do.
Yeah, no, I'm suggesting that it may be worthwhile. The problem is that it's a great event, right?
It's the sad part of it, I think.
Well, it depends on the definition of chronicity of the pain and whether you go from having it completely go away,
it disappears to you manage it. So it's not really as panned anymore.
It's part of living, but it's not as debilitating. Those are different concepts, too.
Because chronic pain by definition is something that's chronically present, kind of like arthritis,
which don't make your arthritis go away. It's either it's mild, moderate, or severe, and then we end up having a replacement surgery
and might go away, or to some extent. But chronic by definition, if it goes away, that process is gone.
So it's an interesting concept, but it depends really on the situation.
I mean, it could be. There are cases of people having chronic pain that goes away with effective treatment.
Hernia repair surgery, why is that so interesting because of the little small nerve in that area that gets irritated at some point,
either from the mesh that's placed or from the changes in the body over time.
Muscle versus fat versus other structures that kind of change over time, and then basically cause a chronic irritation in the area.
And chronic irritation then becomes this chronic pain, but there's some treatments, nerve injections, for example, that can make this thing go away.
Or removal of the mesh can make this chronic pain go away. You literally remove that ongoing signal.
And in this particular case, maybe we didn't really get to the point where the overwhelming changes in the brain.
And then now it's kind of almost impossible to reverse it. Yeah. To some extent it is possible.
Spinal core stimulation, peripheral nerve stimulation can also, to some extent, slow down, or maybe even stop some of the chronic pain states.
And I'm not really sure what the mechanism of that is.
But does this spinal core stimulation give you, is there enough subjects who say, okay, I'm done, I don't have pain anymore?
And I can turn this thing off and go home and I'm happy.
Yeah, it's a matter of how many patients do you need to see so you can say that yes, it definitely stops the chronic pain.
But I've seen it, I mean there's reports of it, so it's possible.
But it's definitely a minority of patients who have to say it's more like a management tool rather than a cure tool.
Also stress, this is something stress. So sometimes patient has acute and very strong stress.
In some cases that can distort pain and the pain gets better versus the chronic stress that amplifies pain.
And stress may be not only something like a stressful event, it can be something that we don't know exactly what is it, but it's other structures that are involved, brain structures that are involved.
In some cases it may stop pain, in some cases it may amplify, we don't know, we can predict it at that point.
But I guess that in those chronic patients that all of a sudden they get better, there was something that a good doctor can ask about, something that happened to this particular patient.
For example, I know myself a woman who had breast cancer after post-infected pain for years, and then it happened that she just went to some yoga class with her friend.
And that helped.
I don't say that yoga helps to cure the pain.
In this particular woman there was something else that happened, and we don't know always what it was.
Single event you're talking about, or maybe ongoing, full explanation, full pain going away.
Good concept, I mean distraction helps too.
I mean, we always want to put causality on things that they may not have anything to do with each other. Yes, exactly.
So fascinating discussion. I wanted to just add that I didn't hear discussed in anybody's thoughts that are interested.
As human beings, we seek to create meaning, and there's a dimension of the pain experience and how one's culture and spirituality and religion impact their experience of pain.
And we're discussing, I think, more of the neuropathology, physiology of managing pain, but to ignore that dimension of pain may not clinically, I work clinically with terminal pain,
allow us to achieve the best palliation we can.
Absolutely, yes, in a sense, I think at least in earlier societies pain was part of the punishment that God was giving you, and you had to live with it.
And our concepts of pain in this, at least today, is much more how best to get rid of it. So those are very different concepts.
In some countries, pain, you have to define your pain as a really critical pain to draw attention from the clinicians.
And I know from my friends from China and my friends from Russia that, you know, whatever we have as a clean, clean, clean, painful condition here is not considered as pain there.
And you know, like labor pain till very recently was something that you have to deal with, and it's part of the life, and nobody thought about anesthesia during labor.
And now we're talking about anesthesia during the circumcision, you know, everything should be pain free.
And this is very different concepts, but interestingly that sometimes you think it is a different cultural thing when it is still something anatomical and physiological.
And the example is labor pain in different cultures.
For example, my friend who is OB and physician, she told me that there was a perception during the clinicians that women from India, they have more pain compared to other women.
And apparently it's not that they have more pain, it's because of the anatomical differences, the course of labor should be considered very differently in these women.
And so the whole management of labor should be different, and then there will be less pain.
So it's not completely religious, cultural or ethnic things, it's all together.
Of course, at least in the monotheistic religions, hell is basically pain, right?
That's how we conceptualize, burning pain, flagellation, suffering, it's all defined by pain.
Expectation is very important, preparedness.
And those are very important mechanisms to deal with pain and feel the pain.
And a lot of times from what I can see that folks are prepared to have surgery or something else, that they're prepared to deal with pain, expect to have some pain, tend to perhaps deal with it better than other folks, they're very surprised by the notion that there's going to be pain, it's going to be bad, it's going to be painful.
So almost as though your defense mechanisms are to go up or go down, which help you, not help you to deal with pain.
Henry?
Thank you for a very interesting, very nuanced discussion of a very complex subject.
And I particularly want to refer back to the social and temporal setting of this and your remarks, the different kinds of pain are really very different and need to be thought of very differently.
While I was thinking about this last night, there was an ad on television for painless dentistry.
That was the first time I've seen a television ad for painless dentistry.
And of course, pain can be lethal, and it is.
Ten blocks from here, a very prominent performer and actress died two years ago because she was under General Anesthesia for a procedure that generally we would not have put somebody under General Anesthesia for.
She had an upper endoscopy and died of the anesthetic consequences of it, she had a cardiac arrest.
It's estimated that 70,000 Americans die of opiate overdose or fentanyl, which slips into their illicit opioids.
Would you say something about this epidemic of opioid misuse?
Well, I think one of the main issues nowadays is the overuse of opioids, epidemic of opiates, and problems that go along with opiates.
And the different ways to kind of explain it, perhaps or try to explain it, but it goes along with the concept of dealing with pain, treating pain.
And here it's a very effective medications for acute pain, but then if they're used for extended periods of time, there's all these other problems and issues that happened.
And that's basically what happened.
It's been quite a solid stop of the use of opioids for years, and people, expectations change, and people's expectations are different.
The way of dealing with pain also was different, and hence this resulted in this abundance of opioids being used around and abused around and causing problems.
And now we're going...
You know, I'm old enough to remember the history of opiate abuse coming to this country.
In a sense, about 15 years ago, there were a number of prominent papers published saying, oh, if you have chronic pain, you don't get addicted by opiate use.
So let's give everybody who has chronic pain opiates, and 10 years later, this is where we are.
Well, I think it also stemmed from a change in the directive of a lot of hospitals, right?
I mean, that pain wasn't being treated effectively in a lot of people, and so they started this system to measure it with the smiley, or the 10-faced system of how much pain you're in.
And then it became pressure, I think, to prescribe these opioids.
And now, actually, it's because of this epidemic, it's reversed, and now the concern for a lot of people that need the drugs is that they're not going to get them.
Yeah, but there was a real scientific sort of debate on this thing about 15 years ago, and we all said, oh, yes, you know, if you have chronic pain, all your opiate receptors are upregulated, they all need opiate.
To be bound, and then your pain will go away, and why aren't we giving these patients more pain?
It's just a combination of these things.
I've published some of those papers.
And I've been watching this for about 65 years.
Thirty years ago, we tried to get a hospice unit started at one of the major academic centers here in New York Hospital, and we didn't succeed.
However, there are now 5,000 hospices in the United States, and they vary all the way from terrific to not so terrific.
It was addressing a different problem. It was the addressing the under treatment of people in the last six months of metastatic cancer with the kind of chronic problems that we talk about now, low back pain, migraine.
So the subject really changed, and I think that's to the point that you made that different pain has to be thought of differently.
So if we overreacted, part of the problem is it takes a lot less time to write an opiate prescription than to sit down and discuss some of these complex issues.
I have some good news. The good news coming from two different directions.
One is I spent two years out of the air, the right division, and so at least now any new formulation of opiate or any new opiate has to be abused.
This is like the new merger. So it will be difficult to abuse at least. So from this degree, from the abuse direction, there is something that we can do.
And from other direction is now there is a number of labs and companies that offer the genetic testing for opiate addiction.
So we are not talking about abuse. Abuse is different, behavioral, also, but for the addiction now we can predict those who have to be far away from opiates because they are going to develop addiction at some point.
So if we can predict, we can come up with different plans, statistical plans for pain management in those patients.
Again, not for everybody. We are going narrow now.
More proportion of the population is higher.
For the addiction, there is no numbers because it depends. It depends on many factors including the age and the sex of the patient.
So it's more complex.
So can anybody comment on the mechanism and efficacy of the use of CBD in combating or alleviating chronic pain?
CBD.
All of this behavioral...
Cognitive behavioral therapy.
No, no, no.
CBD and THC are both ingredients in marijuana. THC is like that can't graduate you.
The CBD is... when they isolate it, is the portion that can alleviate pain.
Yeah.
I'm not supportive.
I'm not supportive.
In other states, I think it's called New York now also.
So there is definitely some good science showing that in fact there are some variants of it have good efficacy at the peripheral level, the low-susceptive level.
We've guided in chronic pain models in animals and it has not shown any efficacy.
So on the other hand, there are some people obviously who swear that it's very effective with them.
Do they have a whole 7-cannibine system?
Oh, yeah, absolutely. Yes.
So, I mean, they have it both in the periphery and it's too out of the way.
So cannabinoid receptors are everywhere in the way. Every neuron has cannabinoids on it, which is part of the issue.
In a sense that it's not going to be a specific effect. It will affect every synapse in the way.
Okay?
From the clinical data so far, we can say that there is no pure analgesic effect of marijuana or any cannabinoids.
There is some effect on, you know, and this is very close to get high.
So the patients may have better mood. They may deal better with the condition, but it's not analgesic.
And if we're talking about adverse effects, they exist and more in women.
Thank you.
On the other hand, it's probably just as good as a glass of wine.
So, you know, it's less than wine.
Yeah.
Okay.
You mentioned meditation briefly. Any thoughts about hypnosis?
I know at Stanford University for at least decades have been researching pain and hypnosis.
Hilary DeGard did it back, I think, in the 50s, 60s. Davis Spielberg is there now.
And you mentioned brain retraining. We've seen that hypnosis and visualization would be a great way to retrain the brain.
The example you gave with a foot could have done that through visualization.
So any thoughts about that?
There are, there was a famous study where they took patients who were in pain and they hypnotized them.
And they told them that the unpleasantness of their pain would go down or the unpleasantness of their pain would go up.
And then they went and tested them. And yes, the unpleasantness would either go up or down depending on the hypnosis,
whereas the sensory component, how painful was, that was unchanged.
Right.
So, yes, you can. I mean, that's, again, the part of the brain that's involved in the unpleasantness, the suffering that's associated with pain,
that's the part that was being able to manipulate it through hypnosis.
I have one thing to tell you about. It's not about hypnosis per se, but it's about virtual reality.
This is now a new phenomenon to treat pain, especially chronic, especially acute pain in pediatrics.
So this is a helmet with virtual reality. And by the end of March in Florence, there will be a sim-part conference where we have a workshop on virtual reality.
And you can see how this particular thing works tremendously in distracting the attention.
And so the children with burns and that they can't allow anybody to touch when they have this helmet.
You can do whatever you want and change everything and they don't pay any attention.
So it's not hypnosis because it's all just very temporary when the child or the doubt is in the helmet, but it works better than any of those.
Any other reasons I have hypnosis? Is that my one of being expensive?
But all the technology hypnosis would be inexpensive and you could teach everyone to do it.
Yeah.
You can do the same thing.
Okay. Last question.
This has been great. I'm a manual therapist.
And when I went in to practice, I thought I was going to touch people and have an effect on their tissues.
And what I have found that I actually do in my practice is work with people around their anxiety about sensations that they're having in their body.
And what I try to do because I have the luxury of spending hours in a room with people is sort of develop, help them develop a personal epistemology of sensation in their body, or at least start thinking about it that way.
To me, I feel like one of the really core issues that we have in this whole conversation is a real poverty of language that we're talking about pain.
Which can mean everything from stretching a muscle into a new area for the Golgi organs, taking them to a new stretch or tearing a muscle.
It's all pain.
What I have, the other thing that I have found is that I used to think about getting people to a pain-free state. And now what I think about is getting people to a suffering-free state.
And the difference, I think, is you're never going to be pain-free.
If somebody's telling you that, they're a charlatan. But you can feel empowered about the fact that the sensations in your body are organic, they're normal.
We don't talk, I think culturally, we just don't talk about it enough. We don't share the fact that you're going to have sensations in your body all day, every day, for the rest of your life.
Some of them will have different balances, but you don't have to be reactive to it.
That's great.
No, no, no. In a sense, I love the story. It's wonderful because we have published the data that in patients, in the same patients, when they had acute back pain, their brain activity was in the sensory regions of the brain.
It looked like acute pain. A year later, the ones who are still having pain, they're wearing activity.
For the same pain that they describe the same way is all in emotional areas of the brain.
They're in the frontal cortex, they're in the amygdala, in the acumbens, in these limbic regions.
So, in fact, the concept of their pain has shifted from being a sensory input to an emotional state that they're bearing, that they're living with, in a sense.
So, that's the explanation we've made to the data of the brain activity.
I thought what you said about the immediate reduction in dopamine right after that.
That's very interesting to me, and it immediately made me think, what if we just got in bed with a loved one right after they just gave him a nice massage?
That's like it is appealing to me.
That's good too.
How much on this? We're almost done.
All right, last question.
Last question.
Maybe two questions is one.
Are there any other things which, there are some other things that we have some clues about affecting court brain size, and maybe a mid-lule size, I don't know enough about it.
But meditation will sometimes make the brain larger, physical exercise, perhaps.
It's interesting that people who are fibromyalgia get better with exercise, and whether there is any documentation in chronic pain states like that of changes in amygdala size, and the effect of the brain.
Of those things which may cause brain enlargement upon chronic pain, such as physical exercise and meditation.
I don't know about the evidence of exercise.
Exercise does increase brain, I don't know about size.
Exercise, at least in animals, improves adult neurogenesis in the hippocampus.
In fact, the same can be shown in humans as well.
We have data that neurogenesis in the hippocampus is in fact affected with chronic pain itself.
There is that link in fibromyalgia, there is brain, local decreases, again in grey matter density.
Again, I don't know if there is any data about recovering from fibromyalgia to see if those things reverse or not.
Some of these data are consistent, but they're too few and too little to really make a bigger, grander theory in a sense about them.
Okay, thank you.
