 I'm Ed Nurse, Assistant Director of the Helix Center. Before we begin today's program, I would like to thank our program coordinator, Alex Herbert's service for his hard work in putting our programs together and for making sure they run smoothly. Especially during the pandemic, he says required much work and Alex has been up to the challenge. I would also like to thank Miguel Nogera of Multimine, who has made it possible for us to continue our programs on Zoom and to reach a broader audience by posting them on YouTube and our website. This program on placebo, NOCBO, was proposed and implemented by Beverly Zabriski, a member of the Helix Executive Committee, and she will be moderating the discussion. For those of you who may recall, there was a program at the Filocreides Center years ago on this very same topic, and it will be interesting to find out how the thinking has evolved on this subject. For turning the discussion over to Beverly, I would like to let you know about our upcoming programs. In April, we will be taking up the topic of stress, and sometime in May, we hope to organize the discussion on poetry, tentatively focused on early 14th century expressions of this art form. And now Beverly will introduce the party. Thank you. Good afternoon, everyone, and welcome to the Zoom iteration of the Helix round tables. We are in little rectangular squares rather than in a circle, but the sensibility of the program will follow that wonderful circular exchange among persons from many different backgrounds on a specific topic. We are missing, we will be four today rather than five, as one of the speakers was unable to attend Phoebe Frisson. And it's my pleasure to introduce these people. Some of them know each other, for some it's a blind date, and I congratulate you on your courage to negotiate such a situation. I'm only going to read the titles of, and you know, just the major posts of each of the participants, and then ask each one to reintroduce themselves and tell us what their work has been, what led them to it, and what their focus is right now. So Luanna, Kalloka, born in Italy, we just found out. She's on the faculty at the University of Maryland in Baltimore. She has a master's degree in bioethics and a PhD in neuroscience and completed a post-doc training in Stockholm. And she's going to be telling us what she is now delving into. Katherine Hall is the Femmen's Spirit Tree of this program. I heard Katherine in June of 2019 at a Science of Consciousness Conference in Interlochen, and I was so impressed that among the 750 participants at that conference, I swore that I would find a way to bring her to heal. So Katherine, I so appreciate your willingness to participate in this. And she's Director of Basic and Translational Research at the Osher Center for Integrative Medicine, an Assistant Professor of Medicine in the Division of Preventive Medicine at Brigham's and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School. She received her PhD in Microbiology and Molecular Genetics from Harvard University, where she spent 10 years in the biotech industry, tackling problems in drug discovery and development. And then she became an Associate Director of Drug Development at Millennium Pharmaceuticals now to Keda. And she will tell you what else she has done in her very full life. Gerald Horowitz is a fellow member of the Helix Executive Committee. He's Assistant Professor of Clinical Psychiatry and on the faculty at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons. He practices the psychopharmacology and neuropsychiatry. And he's a Founder and Chief Medical Officer at M3 Information. An information technology company that focuses on mental health and integration into primary care. And Robert Kletzman is another man who is an inspiration. And again, I'm very grateful. He agreed to join today. He's a Professor of Psychiatry at the College of Physicians and Surgeons in the Mailman School of Public Health and the Director of the Online and In-Person Bioethics Masters and Certificate Program at Columbia University. He's written over 150 scientific journals and concentrated on the psychiatry doctor patient, relationship and other areas and some of his many books are listed on the website. And he's also received numerous awards. So I knew a bit about placebo's from myth and opera and drama, love potions and all that. But when I looked it up, just to get a little bit more intelligent notions to express here, I was really surprised to find out that placebo comes from the opening line of the Catholic Church Vespers. And on the one hand, it means I shall be pleasing. And on the other hand, it means I shall please the Lord in the land of the living from the Vespers for the dead. I had no idea of that link and also of the different ways and the different centuries, the idea of placebos went from sham to an essential aspect of cure. And so I'm hoping that this discussion and I know it will address this notion of placebo in many various ways. So Luanna, could you tell us more about your work? Thank you very much, Beverly, and everyone for the opportunity to talk about placebo. My lab at University of Maryland is funded by the National Institutes of Health to study the neurobiology and phenotypes of placebo responders. The goal is to understand the neurobiology of placebo and it is fascinating to learn now many patients experience benefits because of placebo effects. Our goal is to try to understand behind the cultural aspects that is fascinating, the anthropological component, how our brain can trigger changes in a cascade of neurobiological substances to produce reduction of pain, reduction of anxiety, reduction of mood. So the goal is really to trigger the mechanistic aspects of placebo effects. And a little bit I got into this era of research because as soon as I finish my degree in medicine, I decided to start a PhD in neuroscience. This is which from medicine to neuroscience. Always I wanted to reconcile the medical approach with the neurobiological approach and try to go back and translate and bring back harness what we learned to the bed decides how to move into patient health. Catherine, would you tell us about your background and work? Sure. So as you said, I'm at Brigham and Women's Hospital in the Osher Center for Integrative Medicine at Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital. But my focus is on understanding the genetics of the placebo response, or I should say the genomics of the placebo response. We became really interested in that when we were trying to figure out if, firstly, if there were actually genes that were associated with placebo response, but very soon after we found several genes that we think are associated with the placebo response, we rapidly became aware of a very interesting interaction that seems to be happening with the genes and the drugs as if the drugs are perturbing placebo responses in a subset of patients depending on the genotype. So a very complex kind of web of interactions. And so my background is as a geneticist. And I, as you said, spent I think a total of 15 years in the pharmaceutical industry manufacturing drugs. And certainly the placebo response is the bane of the pharmaceutical drug developer in particular in neurobiology and psychology, psychological conditions, developing drugs for pain, depression, schizophrenia, irritable bowel syndrome, we're often have to deal with these high placebo responses and really understanding why has been an interest of mine. As Luana knows, I've spent some time over the last year writing a book on placebos called the placebo paradox. And I have been amazed at what I learned taking a deep dive, as you kind of mentioned, into the history of placebos and all the way to the current times to understand why and how they're influencing us in clinical medicine and in clinical trials and drug development today. Maybe I can join in. I thought I would say something about my perspective, which is from being a clinician being patient, mostly through a biological treatment form, a psychopharmacology, although I'm always mindful that patients experience and the phenomenology of their experience is important to them, of course, and plays a role in their getting well or not. It's interesting. I often confronted this comment by some of my patients will say, oh, this is a chemical depression, or I can tell this is not a chemical depression. I'm sorry that I have a little bit of a smug sense of the, I have to chuckle about that because I thought I don't know how one could tell such a thing. But in any case, I often come back with the following. I say, you know, everything that you think and feel is reflected in your brain. There's some biological aspect up at the question is, is it relevant in trying to get you better to take a hold of your problem from a biological sort of end of things or from a talk psychological end of things. And of course, sometimes you need both. But it's interesting to think that when we think of the placebo effect, it seems to me even the term itself, the SIBO effect suggests almost like a bio well, anyway, for most of us now in modern times, and kind of a biological limb, we're thinking, well, how does it impact the brain? And so, but every interaction that's not strictly speaking, pharmacological impacts the brain physically also. I mean, our thinking and our talking does that. So I was wondering as I came up into this really fascinating topic, to what degrees the placebo effect, just like thinking and talking anyway, how much property do they share because our thinking and talking effects are biology. Right. I found one saying about it, which was, cure occasionally, relieve always, console often. I thought, there's a description of what the placebo does. Robert, tell us about your work and the ethical implications of this. Yes, Tom, you. Yes. Thank you for the invitation to be here and what a wonderful panel and a center you have and I'm really pleased to meet some of you and be part of it. I thought I'd talk about how I got interested in a number of areas I work on, which is closely related to placebo. And that is when I was in college, I was assigning what I wanted to do when I grew up, as many of us do, when I was interested in the brain, but also the mind and the humanities and didn't know what to do. So I got a job at the NIH at the laboratory for Center Nervous System Studies for a man and cotton gaitishek who just won the Nobel Prize for studying diseases and stone age tribes around the world and finding a number of them, particularly one called kuru in Papua New Guinea that ended up being the same as mad cow disease. And so when I graduated college, he sent me to live with a stone age tribe for you in Papua New Guinea studying kuru, which is caused by, we now know, a prion. And the disease had wiped out two thirds of the tribe. And so I would meet shamans who said that they could cure the disease. It was spread by cannibalistic rituals. When someone died, their loved ones would eat the person. The people would say to me, this, well, always a part of my mother inside of me. And so long story actors wrote a book about it called The Trembling Mountain, a personal account of who cannibals and mad cow disease. But when I met the shaman, he claimed that he had cured many, many people of the disease. And I said, what's the treatment? And at this point, the cannibalism had stopped about 20 years before, but anyone who would have had a thought they had the disease. And he said, I have a treatment. What is it I asked him? We had not had any treatment for this in the US and the West. He said, it's very simple. I tell people that for two weeks are not allowed to drink water or have salt or touch, remember, the opposite sex. I give them some herbs and I cast a spell on them. And I said, well, who have you cured? And he said, all these people here, and he pointed to 20, 30 people who were around me. And he said, he cured them. And I said, well, have you not cured anyone? He said, yes, that one person over there who was the one person I had diagnosed with the disease. And I said, well, how come he didn't get better? He said, very simple. He didn't follow the treatment. But what struck me is how there was no treatment available. And so people out of desperation strongly believe that this disease was caused by sorcery, could be cured by sorcery. I should say one other anecdote on this. People believe that a sorcerer would take something that belonged to you and wrap it around a stone and bury it. People would hide their belongings. And so it was said that sorcerers could even just take food scraps and wrap it around from you, wrap it around a stone. And they dig up stones and say, see this stone here? This is the stone that killed my mother. And I'd say, no, who is caused by a little thing like an insect? And they said, show it to us. And I said, it's too small to see you to special machines. And they'd say, well, what does it look like? And I'd say, we don't know. We hadn't identified. They said, well, have you seen it? I'd say, no. And they'd say, that's just the magic. It's a stone that killed my mother. So I got very interested in how do we understand what is a disease? How do we understand what is a treatment? How do we define these things? And how desperation can lead to us to think that things may or may not get better, certainly relieve anxiety. The disease had wiped out as I said 2 thirds of the tribe. And from that, I ended up getting interested in ethics in a number of ways. I can very briefly, my first day as an intern in the hospital, I was given a list of patients. I was told, go take care of them. I met the first one, a woman cutting her grapefruit, complaining the grapefruit wasn't fresh, and went out in the hall, and my resident said, what have you done so far? I said, I spoke to him. It's so and so. He said, she's dead. Don't waste your time with the dead. I said, what do you mean she's dead? I just spoke with her. He said, she's dead. And in her mind, she was DNR. Do not resuscitate. And therefore, don't waste your time with her. Just ignore her. And my heart froze. And I thought, gee, how are we defining? Who we spend time with and who we don't? How are we defining what is life, what's death? Who is going to live? Who is going to die? Who am I to be making these decisions? So that got me interested in ethics. And since then, I've done a lot of work. I wrote a book called, am I my genes, confronting fate and family secrets in the age of genetic testing, understanding how do we understand genes and the roles in our lives, et cetera. But so I would say, overall, I take some might say anthropological perspective to try to understand how patients and doctors understand what is treatment, what its effects are, et cetera. And I think that's in various contexts and look forward to the discussion today. So please feel free just to start to engage with each other and what your thoughts and after thoughts are. And I'm sure this is going to be very fertile. Gerald, I was curious to know what you understand from your patients when they tell you they have a chemical, that depression is chemical. Like, what does that mean? Well, there's a, there's a, you know, there, it's interesting. There are a wide range of people who will use that phrase. I can usually size out from the be very first consultation with someone, whether they prefer the notion that all of their emotional troubles derive from some, you know, quote unquote, chemical imbalance, whether or not it's so, it's different from saying whether they prefer that to be the case. Some people really prefer that to be the case and they'll identify their troubles as deriving from this underlying biology. Again, to some degrees, it's very legitimate inference. Another case is maybe not as much. So the problem would be in a case where there's something in between where people reflect some combination of some biological instability, we'll call it. And some aspect of their, the way their brains interface with their life and their experience. And we call that their psychology, right? And I think, let's say it's a little bit of a way, some of these folks are motivated to suppress some of the psychological components of psychological inputs to their distress. And I'll say one other thing about this. I think for me, because I don't administer, I don't say to someone, here's a placebo, or I don't give out a medicine that is that I know to be a placebo. But I certainly know a lot of what I provide patients is a placebo effect. I like to think that the medications I give have a particular mechanism of action and they'll come into effect and cure what I'm trying to help them with. But in many instances, I know having a positive feeling about the drug may work well or the patient might have a miraculous recovery in sort of too short a time interval. You think, well, that's not, I can't be the pharmacological effect. So that's one thing. You're raising different aspects related to the placebo phenomenon. Anyway, we like to think that placebo's components are part of any treatment, any active treatment. If you take an antidepressant together with the action of the antidepressant, there is a psychosocial component that is the shamanic component. Eventually, the only patient who didn't respond was because he had a depression disease, or because of some genetic asset like we will learn from catering that some patient do not respond to the placebo component of active treatments do not respond to the placebo's. So when I started to study the neurobiology of placebo, I was working with Parkinson patients. We were in a very special setting, implantation of a deep brain stimulation to study patients with Parkinson's who do not respond to the typical cocktail of anti-depressant Parkinson's drugs. And the goal was to try to understand if during the surgical procedure, we can study the changes occurring at the level of neurons when a patient expects to receive dopamine. In particular, we were using a pomorfen that is a dopamine agonist. So the goal was to try to understand if giving a placebo in a surgical room can produce a change at the level of neurons. And in a blind, counter-balance way, patient receive in a subcutaneous part of their arm and injection of the placebo. And we were recording from the other part of the setting without hearing the time of injection, the neuronal changes occurring together with the injection of this placebo. And as a neurophysiologist, together with the surgeons and colleagues that were neurologists, we were recording under the cells changing the spike. So when you see something changing in the brain because a patient receives an injection of a placebo, you understand the power of the mind. So there is something that is not merely philosophy or something that we read in a narrative book. It's really a link between the neurobiology, our ability to change the response, treatment, and what we call the neurobiology of the effects. Importantly, we don't need to necessarily placebo to study placebo effects. Today, we know that there are many different treatments that we have been using in clinical setting to explore how this power of the mind can somehow either amplify the response to what treatment, for example, an event, an opioid or another drug like ketamine. And we also have either an increase of the benefit, like people experience larger analgesic effects, larger antidepressant or production of unsighted. But some other patients responding up paradox a way like Catherine main mentioned in her book, where we see a worsening of this symptom. So then you understand that studying the placebo phenomenon can be quite complex. So we have patients that receive a placebo and they respond to the benefit. Patients who receive an activity treatment like an opioid and they respond as if it was a super drug magic. I told a patient we use the same treatment, a placebo for pain therapeutic or antidepressant, no matter what we do, they don't respond. So that is a little bit to what make me interested in leading my team at the University of Maryland in exploring these phenotypes of placebo effects. So we are last clinicians, physicians, psychotherapists. We know that there is something relevant about this interaction with our patients that trigger the sort of interesting phenomenon for which patient improve. But what are these kinds of things and why eventually they occur? And the big question is why some patient do respond and some other patient respond minimally but not told with a sort of a disease. How much of a placebo response for how long or which things. So is it generalizable or are there patients who either do or don't respond or I can imagine and they're being sort of a variety of phenotypes of how much based on what factors, et cetera. I mean, I think it's so complicated because there's so many factors that drive placebo response. For years, we've focused on learning, conditioning, and expectation as a key driver and certainly they are. But now we know several genes that modify response to placebo treatment, not necessarily a placebo effect. These genes might be associated with just the natural history of the condition. So for instance, one of the genes we study is a gene that breaks down dopamine. And so we hypothesize that people with high dopamine because their enzyme that the gene codes for doesn't work as well, that the people who had more dopamine would be placebo responders. And we did indeed find that. But is that person always a placebo responder? Can I tell them that they're a placebo responder and change their placebo response? Can I tell them something not harmfully negative but something like, oh, this doesn't work very well. And can I get from them a more powerful negative response which we call a nocebo response? So are they just labile, suggestible people? Or is this in the context of the condition that we studied in that case, it was IBS, that in the context of IBS, these people are a placebo responder. One question that we like to think about is if I do a clinical trial and depression and I find this set of people with responders to placebo and depression, if I put them and many people have comorbidities, so this is not an unlikely scenario, if I put them in a hypertensive trial for an anti-hypertension drug, would they be placebo responders there? And so I think there's so many questions and it's such a rich and fascinating field that I think we're only beginning to scratch the surface. Indeed. And to start to address these questions what we are doing, catering myself and many other in this era of research, bring these questions back to the lab. And we somehow try to study each component. So we use script randomize, we create the largest so far database of patients with temporary or cellular disorder funded by the National Institute of Dental Chronic Fashion Research, wherever, that has had over 800 patients that come and came to the lab to try to understand is very severe pain related to placebo. Do sex interfere and sex and race interfere with placebo responsiveness? How long a placebo response can last? And for example, what we published recently is that severe irritable pain, number of years of temperament Ebola pain that is chronic disease emerging, affecting many young people. And with many other pain comorbidities, IBS, low back pain, fobrumia, this patient responded to placebo, no matter of how many years they had the TMD, no matter of how severe is their pain. And sometimes the response that we see to placebo is huge, like eight out of 100 on a scale from zero to 100 for pain severity, but also we observe that sex make a difference. Women tended to be characterized by larger placebo effects. And this is another fascinating topic where the neuroscience and neurobiology of sex differences contributing to understand why eventually women showed larger placebo effects, which are the mechanism. And another aspect that we are focusing and we publish already, race. Racial differences make a difference again. We are in a special city, Baltimore, that allow us to study a diverse population who have over 35% of the patients who are Afro-Americans. So we have situations and white people. When we compare Afro-Americans with white, again, we see that Afro-Americans have less placebo responses. We are diving into that now to try to understand it's this related to genes. It's this related to the severity of pain that somehow is larger than white, because we have less access to better income and healthcare. So it is fascinating to see that we think about placebo as a difficult topic because also this complex, but at the same time, we can study part by part the placebo response. So I would just add cultural factors also. So there's a large literature shows that people's response to pain and their expression of pain and what they feel is how much you can talk about how much pain you have are shaped by culture. So for instance, there were studies that showed that this was a number of years ago, Italians had lower, quote, lower pain thresholds that given the same amount of pain to people of different ethnicities, Italians who deport higher levels of pain, for instance, and some other groups and other groups less like Scandinavians, less, et cetera. And so I think the feeling was it was more, you know, not how stoical one wants to be in, or the culture encourages one to be versus how expressive or how expressive people feel they're able to be factors like that. So I've been looked at that literature number of years, but I think those may be factors as well and that may play a role in some of this. Well, we had the contribution of Daniel Mormon, an anthropologist from the University of the Michio and who was the first to want to say, hey guys, here, the anthropological part, cultural part, sorry, but European and Americans made the fear in the response to tablets versus injections. And that is fascinating. And again, in this larger court of the patients that we are studying and they're very kind because we invite them several times to the lab and a lawyer to our studies, we start to explore how a cultural background, if they were, you know, somehow Italians, Asians, Chinese or Americans, how this may change the placebo effects. I can't say too much because we are working and we didn't publish that, but the results show that there are strong cultural components that modulate placebo effects again. Well, I was in Zurich for four years, excuse me, Catherine. I'll just say that to that. And of course, in Switzerland, you have the French Swiss, the German Swiss, the Italian Swiss and the Romanish. And in the doctors, in the delivery departments, they could tell you who was from which part of Switzerland and they were all Swiss by the amount of expressiveness and the arias and the laments that were coming from the different rooms. So I wonder if it's really paying thresholds or really the cultural permission to express it and sing it all. But what's felt to be appropriate, yeah. Well, but then also as part of the complexity, there's that affective response, let's call it a primary response of the patient in the face of their symptom. And then that fits into the ecology of their relationship with their doctors because their affect of expression influences their doctors' responsiveness and may create a certain acceptance of the doctor's advice or not, you can imagine all sorts of variations. Let's bring them back to this, Catherine, because for pain, the threshold, and pain tolerance, we know that the genes play a role. Our Americans, again, have a lower in threshold and we know that this difference is linked to several genetic variants and differences. So certainly, you do see differences in the distribution of some of those variants in different populations by race and ethnicity. But I just was reading a paper, there are many, many studies now that are trying to predict who the placebo responder is. Right? Obviously, they wanna do it because in clinical trials, you can either take out your placebo responders or analyze your data a little bit differently. In so many clinical trials are failing, so it's a big problem. But what's really fascinating is, if you look across all the studies and there have been several, starting with just looking at personality alone, looking in the big five for, you know, whether extraversion or openness or agreeableness are associated with placebo response, the data is all over the place. I think you could probably argue that you often see extraversion and openness associated with placebo response, but it was clear that that was too blunt an instrument to really understand who a placebo responder was. And then you had the neuroimagers who did really elegant work and found, you know, either it's the right middle frontal gyrus was associated with placebo response in, you know, in chronic knee pain. But there wasn't a lot of crossover across all these different studies. And you would have thought that despite the heterogeneity in all these studies, if there was a placebo response signature that it would, you know, emerge fast forward to the last, you know, five years machine learning has allowed us to put the kitchen sink in and to ask, you know, like if we combine demographic, psychological measures, neuroimaging measures, genetics, what emerges and what's amazing is you get different things in different conditions and different, you know, types of cohorts. As the computer. The computer start to have a lot of pains. That what you mean? Yeah. Or how the computers feel about it. Right. Yeah. Oh, yeah, headache. Yeah. It's eventually this would be the direction to create consortium where we would have big data sets to integrate, you know. I'm sorry for interrupting. So what was the outcome of that? The one that blew me away was for depression that the level of education was the only thing that robustly predicted your placebo response. And I wonder if you can guess which way it went. It wasn't. But educated. And that would be fixed. Exactly. Yeah. In fact, in fact, the more educated you were, your placebo response was so strong that it was greater than your antidepressant response. Really? Yeah. That's actually, you would be protected. Right. Yeah. This makes me go, I want to go back to this idea about dopamine and dopamine metabolism and expectation. Because of course, those two were often linked together. Anticipation and expectation and dopamine. And I'm wondering, because I feel strongly that those mechanisms play a large role in human consciousness and maybe distinguishes humans from other organisms. And I'm wondering, I have to think, you're going to tell me what I expect here. My expectation is there's not a great animal model for a placebo response. It's not true. I mean, I don't think that's what I'm saying. Yes. I'm happy to hear them wrong. Our studies are placebo in rodents. And how can we create a placebo response in mice or rats or other animals? Well, we use conditioning. We expose animals to medication that can be, for example, rapid action antidepressant, like ketamine. And we expose mice to ketamine for three weeks, two weeks apart. And ketamine induced in mice reduction of anhedonia. This starts to move more. This starts to be more active. After we use, of course, the sense of reduction of the model in animals. And when we replace ketamine, together with my colleagues from psychiatry here, in the mouse model with a placebo, we observe a ketamine like response in mice, suggesting that this open up a new era of research, where we can start going up to a genetic molecular basis of a placebo response even as. And when we engage more people to study animal models and for placebo, I think we then can really understand more and more about this phenomenon. The beauty is that animal responded to placebo. And of course, we can't tell them this drug is powerful. You will feel less pain just because we don't know their language is our limitation. So, but definitely we can use learning. My condition is meant conditioning to create condition at the response and placebo effects. It has been known as the showing pain with both acute pain and neuropathic pain. We are the someone in my lab who recently finished our PhD who study fentanyl in rats with a model of trigeminal pain, again, to explore a placebo effect in rats. So, it's not a problem. And Catherine, in the studies that you were mentioning, do you tell the patients that they're receiving a placebo? And I'm interested in what the ethic is of whether you tell a patient or not. And Robert, you must have put a great deal of thought into this. So, could you give us a sense of that? Yeah, there's a whole new field or of course, nothing is new. If you go back in the literature, you'll see it pretty early on where it's called open label placebo therapy, where you tell the patient that it's a placebo and strikingly, and I think about 10 studies now, they're small studies, we've seen pretty impressive effects where people actually get better. But the key thing here is think about it, right? Firstly, the assumption that if you're on the active therapy that you're going to get better is what creates the biases, what creates the expectation is what creates the placebo effect. So, if you change the script, so you tell the patient what I call the truth about placebos, which is that placebos work sometimes in 33% of people. Some people who've taken placebos have gotten better and they've gotten better for quite a long time. Let's try the placebo in you and let's see how you respond. That's a very different thing from saying, I'm really sorry, but you might get randomized to drug or you might get randomized to placebo. So, it's creating a realistic but positive expectation about placebo can actually influence the outcome. And we've seen now in IBS, in depression, in chronic low back pain, yeah, in several conditions that are functional pain syndromes, you can see this enhanced placebo response with open label placebo. What's interesting is you don't see it in wound healing and you don't see it in places where you wouldn't expect to see it. Placebos don't work to fight COVID. Placebos don't work to fight cancer. I mean, they might reduce your stress or they might help you feel better, but they're not gonna stop the cells from spreading. I would say ethically, and there's a number of interesting ethical questions here that come up. So, the physicians, I think, should not knowingly deceive patients, right? Patients have a right to know what they're getting, what's involved, et cetera. That being said, obviously, patients may benefit simply from quote the placebo effect of, here's something that might help you. I think, and studies have shown that about half of doctors say that they give placebos. Interestingly, there are variations also by geographic region in the United States. So, doctors in the South are 50% more likely to say they give placebos to their patients than doctors in the Northeast or the Midwest, et cetera. But I think what happens is my own view is that a lot of holistic medicine draws on the placebo effect, reflexive placebo effect. Vitamins, for instance, for the average American, I think, are largely, I would argue, in part, the placebo effect, at least for many, many people. Why do you argue that, Robert? I'm just curious, and I hate to cut you off, but I really just think, I wanna ask you to explain the basis of thinking that vitamins are placebos. Let me first finish the point and then I'll answer your question like that. So, my overall point on that is that they're over-the-counter holistic remedies that are sold that I think work, people say they work, and I think a lot of that for many, many people is by placebo effect. And so, I think what doctors can do ethically, and that's your question, Beverly, is rather than saying, I'm gonna deceive you, give you a placebo effect, and say it's a real something. I think doctors can say things like, many patients benefit from over-the-counter remedies, from vitamins, et cetera. And to answer your question, Katherine, data show that the percent of people who actually have vitamin deficiencies is very, very low. So, not more than a handful of percent of Americans actually have vitamin deficiencies. And so, the data, as I understand it, on the use of many men, now, I wanna say, I should say a few things. One is, they're placebos and placebos, and we mean different things by placebos, right? So, that double discussion, what we mean by placebos. Over-the-counter holistic medicine, we mean many, many things. Certainly, there are some people who have vitamin deficiencies, but the average person who takes a multivite, my understanding of the data shows that they don't have a vitamin deficiency. And just if you look statistically, there's certainly a huge percent of people who take a multivite vitamin C, for instance, my understanding is the data shows that, except for the placebo effect vitamin C probably does not have an effect on the common cold, but we like the placebo effect. Obviously, there is people of anemia, et cetera, may have folate other B12 efficiencies, et cetera. But I think for a lot of vitamins out, you know, vitamin C, a lot of things. And certainly, if you look on their various TV shows, drink raspberry juice, this is gonna help cure your cancer. There's a lot of over-the-counter remedies for which I think there are, I would say it's basically placebo effect for people who feel that it's helpful. Obviously, St. John's War, there are acupuncture, I think there's studies that show that it may have some effectives, et cetera. But I think there's a lot of holistic treatments out there that where the placebo effect is what's going on. And I think that those are things that a lot of doctors can have their patients take, or incurred that might be helpful, for instance, we're talking about something. We had a talk in the mouth, who's about it, this face. About 10 years ago, we all realized that many physicians prescribe vitamins, antibiotics and antidepressant, and this is documented in the literature as a tool to evoke placebo responses. And this is, you know, from a professional and medical point of view, of course, not right. So we realized that many treatment I merely suggest that they'll prescribe to make to glyceropation or to make patient respond because of the power of placebo effects. And the other hand, we are talking about open label placebo, that is a sort of new trend, I would say, where patients are deliberately informed, you are receiving placebo, there is a battle with a label placebo, and they are told that many patients respond to placebo, you can try to use placebo. And the reason why we started this line of research, that the capture from many other people, although it was initiated in 1963 by Parske and other people at Johns Hopkins, was to challenge the idea that we need deceptive framework, deception to induce a placebo response. In a sort of, you know, challenging the way, as a scientist, we were sitting around the table and say, what if we tell patients? That is a placebo, and we tell them, please take placebo for two months. There is no deception, there are no theoretical problems because we are not giving line to antibiotics, vitamin in place to elicit a placebo response. The only way to try to understand the pain, depression, and the brain, it is ADHD, low back pain, and a can improve when patients are told you're taking a placebo. I would say that. Question if I may. Yeah. And that's specific, connected to what Luana said, but more with what Katherine said. Are you saying that the etiology of the disease has something to do with whether there is a placebo response or not? In other words, you said for COVID or for cancer, there will be very unlikely a placebo response. Whereas for depression, for example, and you said IBS also, there will be. Yes. I think you want to distinguish between a placebo response and a placebo, the effect of having a placebo response. So you can't necessarily control the response that patient will have. The question is whether or not that response will be effective to minimize or treat the disease that you have. So from what we know, placebos can dial down the areas of your brain that are activated in pain, for instance, and dial up the areas that are associated with expectation that can kind of downward regulate the pain coming up and basically tell you you're feeling less pain. So that, I mean, I think a lot of what we're learning about placebos is very focused in the brain, number one. And number two, along the lines of what Moana just said, with conditioning, you can condition ketamine, you can immunosuppress, condition people to be immunosuppressed, you can condition them to have several biological functions that you wouldn't think of or related to the brain. So in that way, you could modify disease with conditioning and placebo. But for the large part, we don't really think that a placebo response, whether it's autonomic, whether it's immunologic, whether it's endocrine, or whether it's in the brain, is going to stop a virus from replicating in your body and doing what viruses do. So I think from that perspective, we don't think that placebos are effective treatments. And we certainly saw in what transpired in the last year and a half that no matter how much we wanted, some drugs, no matter how much we believed, say that chloroquine might be effective in effective treatment for clotting. People with high expectation might have thought that would drive the effect of chloroquine, but it just couldn't fight the effect of the virus. And I would say too, I think that those conditions in which, for instance, stress or pain or it might be seen as somewhat more subjective symptoms are involved, I think they have more placebo response also. But that extends to, I would argue, even things like cancer, for instance, placebos could have an effect, I think, because we know that anxiety and depression are affected by placebo's can, in fact, also exacerbate harm-wins immune system and heroin's immune system and exacerbate things like cancer. So it may be that there are even more medical diseases may also be affected through those kinds of mechanisms. I think that's the most fascinating aspect. If we think about ourness of symptoms, so if we think about pain unless you have a genetic disease for which you can't experience pain, you know what pain can be, or good mood, or allergic reaction, or itching, or fatigue from cancer, any symptom that we can perceive consciously and we have awareness of, we can modify with verbal suggestions and expectations. But if I tell you your cortisol is going to increase, you don't know what is cortisol increase, or if I tell you your interleukin-6 is increasing and you have information, what IL-6 increase means to us. So we can't change things that we can't access consciously. We've verbal suggestions with the power of our beliefs. But if we do a conditioning, like the mouse model that I mentioned before, we can change the release of IL-6 interferon and many other substances in the body. I was about to say that it seems to me that the nervous system on one hand and then the immune system on the other, which are both very complex, probably the two most complex components of our biology are the sorts of areas where placebo effects can make a difference. And it's interesting that they do process more, let's say, than maybe the lining of your stomach might, let's say, they do process. I mean, of course, the lining of your stomach also processes information, in some sense, but not in a way that I think information in the immune system does. Speaking of the stomach and interleukins, there was a really fascinating article out of nature about two weeks ago talking about IBS and this problem of the patient who develops a lot of pain after almost every meal. And it's interesting because I think it ties into a lot of both no SIBO and placebo issues. And namely, a lot of these folks who suffer from chronic pain, from meals, go through the trouble of trying to isolate what it is in their diet. That might be causing the problem. They'll remove gluten or they'll remove meats or they'll remove, and a lot of these folks end up, and this is the article reflected there, some of them end up chasing their tail because they just simply don't seem to be able to identify what it is that's causing their trouble. They'll rotate diets and so forth very carefully and come up with nothing. And in this study, which was in rats, they found a mast cell release that was unique in the rats who had that model of post-prandial after meal pain disorders. And so then along with that, the release of these interleukin, the inflammatory cytokines, and they found that blocking that effect reduced it. And so, but what happened in the fact is that speaking of the stomach having its own information processing, that somehow the release of the mast cells was in response to, it was tagged almost any meal they happened to just have. So it's almost like the mast cells started to associate itself with the meal of the day, let's say, and created a response that they could block with the appropriate agents. This is interesting because it could have been a no-seabic conditioning, kind of going back to what Loana was saying. You could imagine that there could have been an incidental coupling between something somebody ate and pain, something somebody ate and pain, and now you get this generalized effect. And so it's almost as if cognitive behavioral therapy or some other non-chemical intervention is what it's called for. I wanted to ask one more thing about, if I understand correctly, in the classical placebo experiment, the classical way placebo is used, the person doesn't know that he or she is taking placebo. In the open label, they know they're taking placebo. The second one becomes very close to suggestion, and becomes close to, you know, what we're used to doing the old days, hypnotic suggestion and just suggestion. Whereas the first one, the person is not really getting any suggestion of any kind. They think they're just taking the medication, unless they consider the medication itself a suggestion. So I wondered what the thought is about that. Well, I think the first case also has suggestion. If I say this is a medication, I'm going to give you for your fill in the blank depression or Parkinson's or something else, you're thinking it's going to help me. And ethically, there is a literature about a concept called therapeutic misconception, which is it turns out that even when in research, we tell people, you may be on placebo, a coin is flipped, you know, or whatever. Will you ask people, how is it that it was decided that you're going to get this drug that you're now getting this, this would kill you're taking? They'll say, well, the doctor's side, that's what's best for me. So I think for most people, when they see someone in a white coat in a hospital, give them something, even if they know it's 50% chance it's placebo, they will think it's being chosen to make themselves better. So I think those kinds of expectations get set. Absolutely. Are different kinds of expectations. I mean, in the context of randomized clinical trials, we know that we introduce this concept of therapeutic misconception to account for the desire to get better, the desire to contribute to advanced science. And the open label placebo is something intriguing because we tell patient is a placebo. And we think that merely taking up heal may contribute to a sort of condition and response where patients don't have specific beliefs or I may get 50% of the patients that are in the active arm for this trial. With that expectation to 0% of getting an active drug, you just receive a placebo. And probably the action of taking up heal may trigger a condition at the response again, because we know what is the action of a pain therapeutic and subconsciously, but I'm very carefully using this term, we may trigger body responses that we learned through our life. I bet if we provide the open placebo to children that didn't have yet the experience of being treated, it may have a different meaning unless we say less kindness. So again, there is the complexity of our cognitive functions in interacting with our body response and this connection, you know, at the level of autonomic system, brain system and system that can help to understand the varietal blessings. I would just add to that quickly that I think some of it may also be due to the ecology, people are feeling helpless and going to a doctor's office, even if they're told this is a placebo, you know, I went and saw the doctor, he said I'm not dying of cancer, you know, he seemed or she seemed hopeful. I think those kind of interactions may be part of why an open label placebo may work is, you know, the doctor listened to me, there was a connection, he likes me or she likes me is a relationship. I mean, I think those elements, perhaps, I play a role. I also want to see that and I'm sorry quickly in Ted Kaptrix in both of the recent studies or not, one is not so recent on IBS where people on the wait list, so you're not getting any placebo at all, had a 30% improvement compared to people who got sham acupuncture who had like a, you know, 40% improvement and people who got the sham acupuncture because the plus the warm caring interaction got, 62% of them had an improvement. So just, you know, signing up to be asked questions and give blood can be very therapeutic. I know, sorry, I just wanted to experience being a clinical trial as a patient myself. So I signed up for a trial for insomnia and I was so excited about it. I was driving to work and I thought, well, when I get more sleep, I'm going to call my brother more, I'm going to call my sister more, I'm going to be such, I'm going to be such a better person and I'm thinking all this. And then I'm like driving, you know, I'm in traffic and I said, well, I can, I'm just going to call my brother right now. Yeah, that's great. So I called him and he was like, where are you calling me? I'm like, oh, wow, I haven't even gotten in the trial yet. I'm done with my insomnia. And ironically, I never got in the trial because I was, you know, I had, I had too many exclusion criteria, but, you got cured. Tell us really better. I'm sleeping much better. I, you know, what you started to say, Catherine was a great segue when you jumped in just the second ahead of me, but I was thinking about something I think is related. This is when you mentioned that people in the wait list do better 30% of them do better. What I find in my practice, because I see a lot of treatment refractory patients, they've been on a gazillion antidepressants, typically, and sometimes other meds, but they've been on a gazillion antidepressants, one after the other after the other, and they come to me and they're a wreck. And I typically try to, in a careful way, do a little bit of a washout, you know, take them off the meds as best I can. And that often really helps a lot, not always. Sometimes you have to build it back up. But my point is that I think some holistic treatments, and I wonder whether this actually occurs even in some placebo, the placebo arm of some studies, you know, just removing people from treatments that may have been having pernicious effects, because people, a lot of them are, they're looking for research help because they're refractory, right? So I wonder in how many cases you've removed this. I know firsthand that case that I saw of a woman with very severe depression, like I just described on lots of antidepressants for a couple of years, just doing miserably. And she went away to some sort of holistic spa-like place, and they withdrew her from her meds, and she did really nicely. And she thought it was all of the treatments they had provided to her, including a lot of holistic treatments and such. And that may be that they helped. I'm not that much of a skeptic about it, but I formed the idea that had to do with withdrawing her from the medicines. Sure enough, she had a recurrence of her depression, and she went back, and she didn't do very well this time. She went back taking nomads and arrived in a depressed state. And she came to me and I said, look, I think what happened was you got better largely because you weren't taking your treatment, and they rid you of all those negative effects. And now you've had a recurrence and you have to get to work on it in a more active way, and it worked. It ended up working. But so I'm wondering how much we're moving those pain medicines, for example, when they don't work, especially for chronic pain, and they typically don't very well. They cause a wide range of horrible side effects that really reduce a person's body of life. So I wondered about that. I was going to ask, Catherine, your book, the placebo paradox. Luanna, I can imagine several paradoxes we've been talking about. Luanna mentioned one early on in her initial remarks about that some people placebo actually hurts them or something. But is that, I was wondering what is the paradox? Is that the paradox you're focusing on or others or all of these? What's the plural, Beverly, you might know the plural of paradoxes? Paradoxes, paradoxes. There's so many. For instance, there is actually a thing called the placebo. I think it's actually the placebo paradox where people, like if you do the math on the difference between drug and placebo, it's supposed to be additive. Drugs and placebos are supposed to be additive, but several people who don't respond to psychiatric meds and who do respond to placebo basically mess up that math. There's a formal term called placebo paradox. But I think the paradox, there's so many paradoxes. There is this paradox of people who don't respond when we think they should respond. There's the paradox of it should be additive. And I apologize for jumping on you with the vitamins, but that's kind of my I'm passionate about vitamins. And it's interesting. I want to say why because I think of vitamins as drugs. Vitamins are drugs that we were unable to demonstrate that they were better than placebo in clinical trials. But there's so many natural substances that when we purify them like Willa bark from a willow tree is where we get aspirin, for instance. Statins are extracted from the mold, like the green mold on your bread is where we get statins. So there's so many of these natural products that are actually drugs when we purify them. And then we can demonstrate, or actually a lot of them are grandfathered in, but when you really try and test vitamin E, vitamin E, maybe not so much vitamin B, vitamin C, we can't see a difference between drug and placebo. But my work has shown that genetically there's subsets of people who respond to vitamin E, for instance, and another subset that are harmed, or I should say do worse with vitamin E. And then this subset that responds to vitamin E does worse on placebo. And the subset that responds to that does worse on vitamin E does worse on drugs. So basically, placebo, basically, they cancel each other up is what I'm saying. And so you never see this difference between these vitamins and these drugs. And I would argue that there's so many drugs now that if we took them back through a modern day placebo trial, they would probably fail. And so I think that this is an inherent paradox in how we understand and how we project onto what we think is real medicine and what is actually holistic, or is a vitamin, or what we see as effective. I think the paradox is everywhere. Yeah, if I can just respond to that, great point. Thank you. So clearly, there are strong former ecological properties in many natural substances, right? So lithium's assault. And as you mentioned, there is poisonous plants out there too, and beneficial plants, etc. That being said, the holistic medicine industry is a multi-billion dollar industry in this country. If it's 10 or 20 billion dollars, and I think that for most people, and you see natural vitamin stores, etc. I think for certainly for a lot, I would hypothesize for most, but not for all patients who go in there, what they're coming out with is going to be more placebo effect, or I would hypothesize would be a lot of placebo effect, not from whatever they're buying in the GMC vitamin store, the natural holistic medicine store that actually it's a physiological effect. But I think the work you're doing to tease these out is extremely important and look forward to seeing the results. I wanted to ask also your opinion about a specifically timely thing, which is over my practice for the last couple of months, the major thing that people talk about in relation to their bodies is the effect of the vaccine on their bodies. Some have absolutely no side effects, some have very violent side effects. Do you think there is an expectation factor in that, or do you think it's an immune system issue? They may not be separate though, remember. Yeah, exactly. You working on this right? So you might have an expectation and the side effects to the vaccine, and also people who may not want to the vaccine. There is the huge case in Europe of us transgenic just now. So definitely the immune response and the way we responded to the same trigger in particular the vaccine justify different experience of side effects. Some people may be extremely fearful, anxious, and this can amplify the perception of side effects. But also some people may have the COVID and they may have an amplified the response to the vaccine because there is some memory, a psychological memory to the SARC-COV-2. So it is quite complex, but definitely we need to be conscious to say, well, this is just in your mind. Many people are experiencing severe side effects for this kind of vaccine and the difference in immune system genetics and prior exposure to the virus through the disease, justify a different amount of side effects. There is also a very complex statin related, no-seeable effect that's happening in popular culture right now. There is a belief certainly out there that statins cause muscle pain and several other side effects. And unfortunately, I think that the press certainly has picked this up, but also there are what are called statin denialists. And if you Google statin side effects, you get 10 million hits, 10 million hits. Now, there more recently people have done, researchers have done clinical trials, where people who could never take a statin, they took a statin in three weeks, they had to come off of them because they had such terrible pain. They've randomized them, so they're blinded. They don't know they're taking a statin. And they've actually, there's a type of trial design called N of 1 trial, where you spend a month on a statin, you spend a month on a placebo and a month with no pills, but you don't know what order you're getting or what you're getting. Obviously, you know when you're taking no pills, but you don't know when you're taking a statin and when you're taking a placebo. And what they found was half of the people who went to the end of the study were able to go back to taking a statin. And when they looked at the distribution of side effects, there was no difference between when people had negative side effects with placebo versus when they had them with the statins. So there's obviously, you know, there are people who have muscle pain with statins, there's no question, but there are a lot of people who have probably side effects that are more nocebos and are induced by expectation. And it's so hard to control back in the day, you could kind of say you, the physician could tell the patient what to expect. But now the worldwide web tells us what to expect. And you know, it really depends what rabbit hole you go down. And Lord knows when you go down one of these rabbit holes, you get more and more, you know, the holes kind of proliferate and you get further down and you get stuck. And I think this is a tremendous harm to so many people and very unfortunate. I hope something's on pain, you know, some people who experience pain stop to move stop to exercise stop to have a special life. And this mechanism of fear and anxiety becomes so dangerous. And the same can be probably applied to this 13, modern and nocebo responses where people respond with terrible muscle pain and again pain and stop to take statins without considering that they expose themselves to the risk of heart attack and strokes. So yes, definitely nocebo experience of you know, side effects like pain and side can become a sort of trigger to more negative spectators and the people. I would like to say this one thing is I think it's implied by almost everything that we've said today, but I think it bears emphasis. I mean, I know again as a clinician, when I hear and I hear a lot of complaints about a lot of symptoms and some of them even seem a little bit hard for me to help for. But I never think of it as being I quote unquote in someone's mind. I always think there's some mechanism that's a physical mechanism that's accounting for this. Whether or not it's based on their body's reaction to expectation or to some incidental property of the drug that triggers a nocebo effect, for example, I never think this is some sort of mentalistic something in some mental realm alone. I think of it as being something that's triggered and it's important to try to figure out why why why is this happening to this person. So the important thing is that when we observe this negative behaviors, negative expectation, negative outcomes, it is much more difficult to erase and remove this kind of responses than a placebo response positive outcome. And we're studying the lab to why this happen, which part of the brain is involved. But so probably from an evolutionary point of view, we as human begin tended to respond in a more aggressive way to negative events. And this somehow help us to prevent dangerous situations. But when this become chronic, of course, it become part of the disease that we have difficulty to handle at least from a symptomatological point of view. There's a large literature on that, of course, on sort of Daniel Kahneman, one of the Nobel Prize, we're discussing instead of biases when they have. I just want to mention two things. First of all, I see there's a few questions coming from the audience, we may want to answer a bit. But one thing I just want to come back to the notion that Catherine said earlier about RCPs and the interest ethically to sort of not have people respondable, placebo responders in clinical trials, I think that raises some ethical concerns. So the reason I think what you mentioned is, and I think you're speaking about other drug companies out there doing this, there's a concern, a lot of RCTs aren't working, as you're saying. I would contend, a lot of RCTs aren't working now, but more did in the past, not because there's more placebo response in the world now. That's not what you were suggesting, I know, but because there aren't as good drugs, perhaps. And so the problem with eliminating placebo response in the study is that in the world, when the drug is in a proof, there are, in fact, placebo responders. So you do, in fact, want to know how good a drug is. If I say this is my new drug against placebo, because in the world, that's what's going to happen out there. So I just think that raises a few questions in my mind, just to put it out there. I think this has a bearing, it's not straight on subject, but there was just a report from Cambridge University study that LSD microdosing is thought to have a large placebo effect. Do you have any opinion or knowledge about this? And I think after you're smiling, I think after that, we should go to the audience. Yes, we will. Briefly, in the literature, there is evidence that placebo responses in randomized clinical trials are larger compared to what we observe 15, 20, 25 years ago. And one of the reasons is our marketing, we invest much more in marketing. We are good in, you know, social media in coloring our drugs. So I would be still optimistic on the drug development. We do develop new drugs. We do well as physicians and scientists. The problem of placebo responses becoming larger and larger is also because we do better with engaging in this therapeutic doctor-patient relationship. And another thing that we don't do so well yet, bringing in the mechanism and the knowledge of placebo effects into the randomized clinical trial methodology. Why do we use still as gold standard, the additive model that Catherine mentioned a little ago? We have better tools, we have better designs. And from our work, we have colleagues like Paul and some other people who suggest, let's change the design of clinical trials. The comparison between placebo versus active drug cannot be enough, cannot be just, you know, the solution to say this drug works or not. So we need to think in a more creative and, you know, smarter way how we design a clinical trial for this disease because if we study immune system, it's different than studying schizophrenia. So we still don't play the same clinical trial design, 20 disease, no matter which is the exposure. But what we should go ahead. I want to say that this is my area of interest. I mean, we know that there is a huge influence of expectations and still we don't measure expectations when we do clinical trial. We know that sex, race, influence, the therapist race, and sex, or trialist make any difference. We know that genetic assets change. So if we know all these things, why want to restart with a collection of saliva for DNA with, you know, powerful assessment of social and graphic trial experience of unsexful, pain, therapeutic, and do a better job in design at clinical trial and account for all the variables that at least we know. We don't think that's it. Yeah, I think it's, I mean, going back to the ethics and also to build on Moana, it's a very complex and troubling problem. I think that we are stuck on the double blind randomized placebo control trial and we do need to rethink it. But in looking at what people have proposed, even FAVA's new methodology has hit problems with demonstrating efficacy being more effective than the typical randomized clinical trial. So it's not a simple problem to solve. And I do think the ethics that Robert can raise is super important because think about it. What are we going to give the placebo responders? Are we not going to give them drugs? Are we going to say like, are we going to give them placebos? And I think this is mostly disconcerting and troubling, for instance, in the area of surgery. Recently, there have been a number of clinical trials in surgery where they've actually, usually surgeons for, I mean, I don't even know how long decades, scores of decades have been. They haven't had to do randomized trials. But now, whether it's vertebral plasty or renal derivation or, you know, orthoscopic surgery, like all these are having problems demonstrating efficacy beyond placebo. But here's the problem. If we say that this procedure that we've been doing for decades does not be placebo, so we're not going to do it, are we going to give people a sham surgery? I mean, I don't think it's such a complex problem. I think that we really need to think through the whole thing from whether or not we're going to do the genetics, we're going to update the ethical consideration of ethics of surgical procedure and clinical trial with sham surgery, ethics of open labable placebo, ethics of randomized clinical trials. I would just say there, the problem with sham surgery, especially people put under anesthesia in it, general anesthesia, is there's risk. So ideally, just to put it out there, brainstorm, if there's some way to give a placebo that had no risk, and obviously, there are some things to decide are there placebo responders who've just responded to surgery because of the placebo effect, in which case could there be something that's risk-free, etc. Just as a thought. Let's try something who are simple. Why don't we explain patient? There is no evidence that this treatment is better than sham. Do you still want to go through the sham or do you want to go to Edward and they will explain you more about the placebo phase? That's a great moment. I just want to say one thing I'm a lot. I recently had rotator cuff surgery, and that was one of the surgeries that they had this big uproar about. It was the most painful experience I've ever had, and I would probably pick the surgery, and that's surprising to me, but it's true. It was a pain. I think my shoulder works really well now, and I think somehow, I don't know if I could have gotten there with physical therapy because I would have had the discipline without the surgery to do the physical therapy, but we're all complex beings. On that note, I want to thank you for your incredible exchange here, and let the audience in. There have been several questions that have come up, and Alex, will you moderate that part? Yeah. Okay. First question is from Dr. Diane Garland. Thank you, Diane. So she was wanting to, why don't you guys reflect on the popularity of hydroxychloroquine and Ivermectin in treatment of COVID, despite lack of scientific evidence. I know you brushed on it slightly, so if there's anything more you would want to add on to that topic. I would just say that when people feel helpless, they grasp its straws and want something that's going to make them feel better. People don't like the sense of being helpless, being depressed, to spare, etc. And so people will gravitate to something. One, and secondly, what we haven't talked about is, we'll touch on a little bit, is how politics and political biases affect perceptions of these issues, which I think is a factor. So literally, and initially, the drug was introduced anecdotally, without even ground clinical trials. So somehow we ran away as people to the active drug and placebo to come to deal with evidence that there was no indication for the street. The COVID-19 pandemic was a very difficult situation to under. There was an attempt to try different therapeutic solutions. Now, today we have better answers after one year. The therapeutic protocols for COVID-19 have changed, as the results of clinical trials with a placebo arm. I think there's also a a prescient sort of anti-medicine narrative out there that goes something like this, doctors don't really want to look at certain evidence because that's not the way they're trained and they are biased against certain approaches. That's sort of a little bit of this, that storyline came a little bit into our previous president's narrative about hydrochloroquine, you know, that doctors didn't really, you know, weren't taking these anecdotal reports seriously and sure they sure should. Why are they being so pigheaded about it? That was a sort of part of the negative narrative. I would say that reporters in situation like this have also responsibility to educate, language people, you know, to remember the basis and solid knowledge is the models and media spread examples that can convey false information. Okay, on to the next one. Okay. So this is a question I have to formulate for this commenter on YouTube and I'm only speaking with this level of disrespect towards him because he showed no respect to any of you. And so I think he brings up some points, but I just want to point out that to listen to this for an hour or so and to then come to the conclusion that none of the people here know what they're talking about and that they have no model that satisfies you. I think is, I think shows more about you. This is you're a professional medical, you know, your medical professional, Dr. Kenneth Garcia. I did more work looking into you than you've done it to any of these people. And some of the foremost question for you because you seem unwilling and unable to do this. And I think also to use buzz words in either no context or even with the context you provide that shows that your model is just as simple or even stupid. I think I'm only saying this because of what he wrote and I think it's you're a grown person. You write a question out without resorting to these insults. And so that being said, well, move on. Well, look, let's just try to bring in some of the concepts he brought up because maybe you can reflect on it in a way that with the proper context. So he was curious about the effects of conflict social theory on the placebo effect. And then he talks about CNS hierarchy, central nervous system hierarchy, and nonlinear processing with regards to effects of placebo. So do you guys have any comments to give there so you could satiate is obviously complex model that exceeds our human experience? Go ahead. Complex social theory. Yeah, Luana, do you want to talk about? I mean, I think there are very there are some very sophisticated models that are emerging and are very interesting. One of them is the Bayesian brain or predictive error processing. And some of this work is basically building on work that's being done in neurobiology, not only in placebo research. That is about our brain tending to predict before predict what it's going to see or experience. And then taking the information from the experience and basically integrating or averaging that information to create the experience that we actually experience. And so some of this predictive the Bayesian brain theories have been applied to placebos in particular, for instance, into open to open label placebo to say that, you know, we have a preconceived notion of what to expect when we get a pill. The new information that's coming in to say like, this pill is a placebo, but you might want to try it. And then there's this kind of synthesis of these two in which the person might re reinterpret an experience of feeling better because, you know, our symptoms are going are basically fluctuating over time. So for instance, if in a moment that I take the pill, I'm like, Oh, I'm actually feeling better than I might revise my prior and have a new hypothesis of how I'm feeling. And that might get revised continually to the point where I'm having a quote unquote placebo response that's a military of a positive. And Luana is a much more of a neurobiologist than me and might want to comment on this, you know, these theories that are in the field now. And I like to refer to animal models. The reason why we can study a placebo responses in animals is because we somehow can simplify the placebo effect to a prediction of future events. So if we are receiving a treatment and we try, we, I mean, in this case, our brain as a great machine to make predictions, we may predict based on our experience like this person is offensive because doesn't know this topic to the extent that we know we are predicting a behavior or we can predict a reduction of pain if we experience positive energy, sick effects in our life. So it is complex when we apply patient modeling in general to symptoms, but there is an force by different labs to use the prior experience, current experience and expectation to predict plus it be facts and different kind of modeling and just the vision can be used to anticipate if a person eventually based on different elements that they mentioned can be a placebo responder or not. Do you amplify a little bit on what Luana and Catherine just said in terms of in terms of the brains organization or reorganization. This actually dovetails a little bit into Beverly's question that none of us took a whack at yet. I'm ready to talking about LSD microdosing but there is this notion that the brain of course and this again follows up on Catherine's comment. It has a self-organization as a property of reorganizing itself. In the old days, I think this was what motivated in my mind anyway, motivated early late 19th century German Gestalt psychology research where the brain tended to create holes, you know, holes that the brain and our bodies do create these sort of self-organized states. And the Bayesian model says, okay, right, through a series of iterations, our brains reorganize and occasionally it might incorporate a medication that pushes the biology of the brain in that direction. It might involve thinking and expectation that does that. The idea behind a psilocybin LSD treatment is that when it is supposed to work in as much as it helps to reorganize the way the brain has sort of wrapped itself around the world, around reality. And by giving it a shake and sort of a reboot, your brain can reorganize and you can be happy and not want to use drugs anymore or not have other sorts of psychological symptoms. The study out of it was the Imperial College of London found that in the micro dosing of an amino analysis, the micro dosing of LSD seemed to be pretty much matched with the placebo response in the same studies. But it remains to be seen, of course, the dosing could be changed. It might mean maybe it shouldn't be micro dosing. I'm a little bit of a skeptic of it, but I think it's an interesting theory that does touch on this notion of the reorganization of the brain. Okay. And I apologize. I meant to say complex systems theory anyway, but I only did this because I gave him a chance and I thought it was still trying to get to these topics because I think they could add something. But anyway, so the next question is from Dr. Ralph Wharton. Thank you, Ralph. And they were curious about the kind like hypnosis. So, you know, about they they cloped that 30% of all patients are easily hypnotizable. So how do you think hypnotism and placebo relate to one another? There are studies comparing the brain imaging responses to hypnosis and placebo. And it looks like the two works through different mechanisms. Again, when we explore the brain responses, we may see different mechanisms for things that from a symptomatologic or behavioral point of view looks like something similar. So hypnosis is strongly related to this just ability that much people can be suggesting. And the rest of this that somehow show placebo responder tended to be also more suggestible. However, when we look at the brain, things can change and, you know, hypnosis versus placebo responses, the two things to work through different mechanisms. At least when we talk about pain. Dr. Wharton will be a discussant in our stress round table in April. So thank you for the question. Okay, going to the next one. So this is sort of two birds with one stone because Sharon Gold and Jocelyn Diaz asked questions in a similar vein, but I think put them together they can be quite interesting. So Sharon asks, is religion slash belief that God will make it it being you'll fill in the blank better the ultimate placebo. And then Jocelyn in a similar vein asks, do you believe that spirituality plays a part in one's illness and care? And that do you believe that one can receive more activist cares through dreams? I think there's a few questions there. So I think there's no doubt that data shows that quote religiosity that spirituality can help reduce stress and can assist coping with many conditions. And there's been some data and my colleagues on the call may know it better than I do that it can help with healing, etc. I think one difference is that for many people religion and spirituality involved social supports also. So people will if traditionally people go to a church or a temple, there are other people. And that's I think some of that may work by having social support people care for you knowing that people care for you, etc. So those are some initial thoughts is also Myrna Weisman's group at Yale. I didn't that was it? You know, now she said Columbia for several years shows that there's actually differences in the the the cortex among people in resiliency to depression. Those who are quote have some religiosity, it could just be spirituality without religion per se. There's actually differences in the cortex associated with that that may be involved. So somehow we can compare again, sorry for my approach that is very, you know, but neurobiological based. If we exercise eventually we have the ability to increase structure the area, for example, related to the hippocampus. If we meditate, we also do an exercise of our mind and something in the brain changes a matter of doing this daily exercise. Spirituality is somehow different than placebo effects. We are talking about two different things. Pleasibifices is somehow our expectation about receiving a treatment and perceiving an outcome improvement. Spirituality is more related to our beliefs or fate. How much you believe in something that is independent than the process that we would describe as placebo effects today. I think this approach I does is it gives people a sense of meaning and hope also. So I think the notion of hope may be a common denominator potentially. And it also addresses the emotions with music and ritual and sort of costume and celebration. So that stimulates some kind of sense of really having experience, which is what many people mean when they say something meaningful. Am I really having an experience? I do think that there are ritualistic elements of the clinical encounter. The physician is wearing a white coat. They're wearing a, might have a stethoscope. They do, there's the opening line. How are you doing? What brings you here today? There's a very ritualized aspect to it. So I haven't studied this, L'Huana. So I don't know your brain on spirituality versus your brain on placebo what the differences are. But I do think that there are even the host in communion and is this kind of disc that you get handed and you put on your tongue. I mean, there's a lot of the format of a religious experience that I think is kind of replicated in a clinical setting. And I don't think this is unusual. I mean, our brains are economical organs and it's not making a new pathway for every single different experience. It's kind of funneling experiences generally into these set pathways. So I wouldn't be surprised if there was more overlap. But obviously very difficult to study in the kind of acute setting that we study, the SIBOs in. Thank you. How many more questions are we feeling? I think we should go another five minutes if that's all right. Okay, so I'll just, because there's one more question for someone who hasn't asked yet and then the rest are sort of second questions. So I'll at least do that and we'll see where we are from there. So this is from Darwin, a Gugo Rayas, apologies if I bungled your last name. This was from YouTube. He wrote, is there a comprehensive list of quote unquote domains that are placebo responsive or open label placebo responsive? There are several papers. We try to summarize what has been published so far in our review. And we described the methodological challenges and direction of open label studies. Or whether all these studies have been with an end that is quite limited to try to start to address questions of phenotypes of people who responded to open label placebo. We will need larger studies and before we draw any conclusion about who are the people who may respond to an undisceptive open label placebo. So we made some comments earlier about whether or at least I did about how whether immune and CNS diseases may be at least among the things where there's more of response but not exclusively. And I also know that within psycho within the realm of sort of psychotropic meds, there is a lower placebo response to OCD. As far as I know in most studies and also to psychosis. And it's not complete but there is a lesser response that's been pretty consistent. But overall also, I mean, diseases, conditions for which there are placebo responses, I think within mental health disorders there's a disproportionate number. I think part of the one is comments earlier that it's when one mind how we define that is aware of the symptoms. There may be more of an effect. Well, this has been a wonderfully rich exchange. I really thank you all for participating. And I hope that your communal experience here is having more than a positive placebo effect. But if it's only placebo effect of talking to others with the same interests, I'm happy that we could provide some of it and how much you provided for us. So thank you very much. Thank you for having us. Wonderful. Thanks everybody. Thank you.