I'm Ed Nurse, Assistant Director of the Helix Center.
Before we begin today's program, I would like to thank our program coordinator, Alex
Herbert's service for his hard work in putting our programs together and for making sure
they run smoothly.
Especially during the pandemic, he says required much work and Alex has been up to the challenge.
I would also like to thank Miguel Nogera of Multimine, who has made it possible for us
to continue our programs on Zoom and to reach a broader audience by posting them on YouTube
and our website.
This program on placebo, NOCBO, was proposed and implemented by Beverly Zabriski, a member
of the Helix Executive Committee, and she will be moderating the discussion.
For those of you who may recall, there was a program at the Filocreides Center years
ago on this very same topic, and it will be interesting to find out how the thinking has
evolved on this subject.
For turning the discussion over to Beverly, I would like to let you know about our upcoming
programs.
In April, we will be taking up the topic of stress, and sometime in May, we hope to organize
the discussion on poetry, tentatively focused on early 14th century expressions of this
art form.
And now Beverly will introduce the party.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, everyone, and welcome to the Zoom iteration of the Helix round tables.
We are in little rectangular squares rather than in a circle, but the sensibility of the
program will follow that wonderful circular exchange among persons from many different
backgrounds on a specific topic.
We are missing, we will be four today rather than five, as one of the speakers was unable
to attend Phoebe Frisson.
And it's my pleasure to introduce these people.
Some of them know each other, for some it's a blind date, and I congratulate you on your
courage to negotiate such a situation.
I'm only going to read the titles of, and you know, just the major posts of each of
the participants, and then ask each one to reintroduce themselves and tell us what their
work has been, what led them to it, and what their focus is right now.
So Luanna, Kalloka, born in Italy, we just found out.
She's on the faculty at the University of Maryland in Baltimore.
She has a master's degree in bioethics and a PhD in neuroscience and completed a post-doc
training in Stockholm.
And she's going to be telling us what she is now delving into.
Katherine Hall is the Femmen's Spirit Tree of this program.
I heard Katherine in June of 2019 at a Science of Consciousness Conference in Interlochen,
and I was so impressed that among the 750 participants at that conference, I swore that
I would find a way to bring her to heal.
So Katherine, I so appreciate your willingness to participate in this.
And she's Director of Basic and Translational Research at the Osher Center for Integrative
Medicine, an Assistant Professor of Medicine in the Division of Preventive Medicine at
Brigham's and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School.
She received her PhD in Microbiology and Molecular Genetics from Harvard University,
where she spent 10 years in the biotech industry, tackling problems in drug discovery and development.
And then she became an Associate Director of Drug Development at Millennium Pharmaceuticals
now to Keda.
And she will tell you what else she has done in her very full life.
Gerald Horowitz is a fellow member of the Helix Executive Committee.
He's Assistant Professor of Clinical Psychiatry and on the faculty at Columbia University College
of Physicians and Surgeons.
He practices the psychopharmacology and neuropsychiatry.
And he's a Founder and Chief Medical Officer at M3 Information.
An information technology company that focuses on mental health and integration into primary
care.
And Robert Kletzman is another man who is an inspiration.
And again, I'm very grateful.
He agreed to join today.
He's a Professor of Psychiatry at the College of Physicians and Surgeons in the Mailman
School of Public Health and the Director of the Online and In-Person Bioethics Masters
and Certificate Program at Columbia University.
He's written over 150 scientific journals and concentrated on the psychiatry doctor patient,
relationship and other areas and some of his many books are listed on the website.
And he's also received numerous awards.
So I knew a bit about placebo's from myth and opera and drama, love potions and all that.
But when I looked it up, just to get a little bit more intelligent notions to express here,
I was really surprised to find out that placebo comes from the opening line of the Catholic
Church Vespers.
And on the one hand, it means I shall be pleasing.
And on the other hand, it means I shall please the Lord in the land of the living from the
Vespers for the dead.
I had no idea of that link and also of the different ways and the different centuries,
the idea of placebos went from sham to an essential aspect of cure.
And so I'm hoping that this discussion and I know it will address this notion of placebo
in many various ways.
So Luanna, could you tell us more about your work?
Thank you very much, Beverly, and everyone for the opportunity to talk about placebo.
My lab at University of Maryland is funded by the National Institutes of Health to study
the neurobiology and phenotypes of placebo responders.
The goal is to understand the neurobiology of placebo and it is fascinating to learn
now many patients experience benefits because of placebo effects.
Our goal is to try to understand behind the cultural aspects that is fascinating, the
anthropological component, how our brain can trigger changes in a cascade of neurobiological
substances to produce reduction of pain, reduction of anxiety, reduction of mood.
So the goal is really to trigger the mechanistic aspects of placebo effects.
And a little bit I got into this era of research because as soon as I finish my degree in medicine,
I decided to start a PhD in neuroscience.
This is which from medicine to neuroscience.
Always I wanted to reconcile the medical approach with the neurobiological approach and try to
go back and translate and bring back harness what we learned to the bed decides how to
move into patient health.
Catherine, would you tell us about your background and work?
Sure.
So as you said, I'm at Brigham and Women's Hospital in the Osher Center for Integrative
Medicine at Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital.
But my focus is on understanding the genetics of the placebo response, or I should say the
genomics of the placebo response.
We became really interested in that when we were trying to figure out if, firstly, if
there were actually genes that were associated with placebo response, but very soon after
we found several genes that we think are associated with the placebo response, we rapidly became
aware of a very interesting interaction that seems to be happening with the genes and the
drugs as if the drugs are perturbing placebo responses in a subset of patients depending
on the genotype.
So a very complex kind of web of interactions.
And so my background is as a geneticist.
And I, as you said, spent I think a total of 15 years in the pharmaceutical industry
manufacturing drugs.
And certainly the placebo response is the bane of the pharmaceutical drug developer in particular
in neurobiology and psychology, psychological conditions, developing drugs for pain, depression,
schizophrenia, irritable bowel syndrome, we're often have to deal with these high placebo
responses and really understanding why has been an interest of mine.
As Luana knows, I've spent some time over the last year writing a book on placebos called
the placebo paradox.
And I have been amazed at what I learned taking a deep dive, as you kind of mentioned, into
the history of placebos and all the way to the current times to understand why and how
they're influencing us in clinical medicine and in clinical trials and drug development
today.
Maybe I can join in.
I thought I would say something about my perspective, which is from being a clinician
being patient, mostly through a biological treatment form, a psychopharmacology, although
I'm always mindful that patients experience and the phenomenology of their experience
is important to them, of course, and plays a role in their getting well or not.
It's interesting.
I often confronted this comment by some of my patients will say, oh, this is a chemical
depression, or I can tell this is not a chemical depression.
I'm sorry that I have a little bit of a smug sense of the, I have to chuckle about that
because I thought I don't know how one could tell such a thing.
But in any case, I often come back with the following.
I say, you know, everything that you think and feel is reflected in your brain.
There's some biological aspect up at the question is, is it relevant in trying to get
you better to take a hold of your problem from a biological sort of end of things or
from a talk psychological end of things.
And of course, sometimes you need both.
But it's interesting to think that when we think of the placebo effect, it seems to me
even the term itself, the SIBO effect suggests almost like a bio well, anyway, for most
of us now in modern times, and kind of a biological limb, we're thinking, well, how does it impact
the brain?
And so, but every interaction that's not strictly speaking, pharmacological impacts the brain
physically also.
I mean, our thinking and our talking does that.
So I was wondering as I came up into this really fascinating topic, to what degrees the
placebo effect, just like thinking and talking anyway, how much property do they share because
our thinking and talking effects are biology.
Right.
I found one saying about it, which was, cure occasionally, relieve always, console often.
I thought, there's a description of what the placebo does.
Robert, tell us about your work and the ethical implications of this.
Yes, Tom, you.
Yes.
Thank you for the invitation to be here and what a wonderful panel and a center you have
and I'm really pleased to meet some of you and be part of it.
I thought I'd talk about how I got interested in a number of areas I work on, which is closely
related to placebo.
And that is when I was in college, I was assigning what I wanted to do when I grew up, as many
of us do, when I was interested in the brain, but also the mind and the humanities and didn't
know what to do.
So I got a job at the NIH at the laboratory for Center Nervous System Studies for a man
and cotton gaitishek who just won the Nobel Prize for studying diseases and stone age
tribes around the world and finding a number of them, particularly one called kuru in Papua
New Guinea that ended up being the same as mad cow disease.
And so when I graduated college, he sent me to live with a stone age tribe for you in
Papua New Guinea studying kuru, which is caused by, we now know, a prion.
And the disease had wiped out two thirds of the tribe.
And so I would meet shamans who said that they could cure the disease.
It was spread by cannibalistic rituals.
When someone died, their loved ones would eat the person.
The people would say to me, this, well, always a part of my mother inside of me.
And so long story actors wrote a book about it called The Trembling Mountain, a personal
account of who cannibals and mad cow disease.
But when I met the shaman, he claimed that he had cured many, many people of the disease.
And I said, what's the treatment?
And at this point, the cannibalism had stopped about 20 years before, but anyone who would
have had a thought they had the disease.
And he said, I have a treatment.
What is it I asked him?
We had not had any treatment for this in the US and the West.
He said, it's very simple.
I tell people that for two weeks are not allowed to drink water or have salt or touch, remember,
the opposite sex.
I give them some herbs and I cast a spell on them.
And I said, well, who have you cured?
And he said, all these people here, and he pointed to 20, 30 people who were around me.
And he said, he cured them.
And I said, well, have you not cured anyone?
He said, yes, that one person over there who was the one person I had diagnosed with
the disease.
And I said, well, how come he didn't get better?
He said, very simple.
He didn't follow the treatment.
But what struck me is how there was no treatment available.
And so people out of desperation strongly believe that this disease was caused by sorcery,
could be cured by sorcery.
I should say one other anecdote on this.
People believe that a sorcerer would take something that belonged to you and wrap it
around a stone and bury it.
People would hide their belongings.
And so it was said that sorcerers could even just take food scraps and wrap it around from
you, wrap it around a stone.
And they dig up stones and say, see this stone here?
This is the stone that killed my mother.
And I'd say, no, who is caused by a little thing like an insect?
And they said, show it to us.
And I said, it's too small to see you to special machines.
And they'd say, well, what does it look like?
And I'd say, we don't know.
We hadn't identified.
They said, well, have you seen it?
I'd say, no.
And they'd say, that's just the magic.
It's a stone that killed my mother.
So I got very interested in how do we understand what is a disease?
How do we understand what is a treatment?
How do we define these things?
And how desperation can lead to us to think that things may or may not get better, certainly
relieve anxiety.
The disease had wiped out as I said 2 thirds of the tribe.
And from that, I ended up getting interested in ethics in a number of ways.
I can very briefly, my first day as an intern in the hospital, I was given a list of patients.
I was told, go take care of them.
I met the first one, a woman cutting her grapefruit, complaining the grapefruit wasn't fresh,
and went out in the hall, and my resident said, what have you done so far?
I said, I spoke to him.
It's so and so.
He said, she's dead.
Don't waste your time with the dead.
I said, what do you mean she's dead?
I just spoke with her.
He said, she's dead.
And in her mind, she was DNR.
Do not resuscitate.
And therefore, don't waste your time with her.
Just ignore her.
And my heart froze.
And I thought, gee, how are we defining?
Who we spend time with and who we don't?
How are we defining what is life, what's death?
Who is going to live?
Who is going to die?
Who am I to be making these decisions?
So that got me interested in ethics.
And since then, I've done a lot of work.
I wrote a book called, am I my genes, confronting fate and family secrets in the age of genetic
testing, understanding how do we understand genes and the roles in our lives, et cetera.
But so I would say, overall, I take some might say anthropological perspective to try to
understand how patients and doctors understand what is treatment, what its effects are, et
cetera.
And I think that's in various contexts and look forward to the discussion today.
So please feel free just to start to engage with each other and what your thoughts and
after thoughts are.
And I'm sure this is going to be very fertile.
Gerald, I was curious to know what you understand from your patients when they tell you they
have a chemical, that depression is chemical.
Like, what does that mean?
Well, there's a, there's a, you know, there, it's interesting.
There are a wide range of people who will use that phrase.
I can usually size out from the be very first consultation with someone, whether they prefer
the notion that all of their emotional troubles derive from some, you know, quote unquote,
chemical imbalance, whether or not it's so, it's different from saying whether they prefer
that to be the case.
Some people really prefer that to be the case and they'll identify their troubles as
deriving from this underlying biology.
Again, to some degrees, it's very legitimate inference.
Another case is maybe not as much.
So the problem would be in a case where there's something in between where people reflect
some combination of some biological instability, we'll call it.
And some aspect of their, the way their brains interface with their life and their experience.
And we call that their psychology, right?
And I think, let's say it's a little bit of a way, some of these folks are motivated to
suppress some of the psychological components of psychological inputs to their distress.
And I'll say one other thing about this.
I think for me, because I don't administer, I don't say to someone, here's a placebo,
or I don't give out a medicine that is that I know to be a placebo.
But I certainly know a lot of what I provide patients is a placebo effect.
I like to think that the medications I give have a particular mechanism of action and
they'll come into effect and cure what I'm trying to help them with.
But in many instances, I know having a positive feeling about the drug may work well or the
patient might have a miraculous recovery in sort of too short a time interval.
You think, well, that's not, I can't be the pharmacological effect.
So that's one thing.
You're raising different aspects related to the placebo phenomenon.
Anyway, we like to think that placebo's components are part of any treatment, any active treatment.
If you take an antidepressant together with the action of the antidepressant, there is
a psychosocial component that is the shamanic component.
Eventually, the only patient who didn't respond was because he had a depression disease, or
because of some genetic asset like we will learn from catering that some patient do not
respond to the placebo component of active treatments do not respond to the placebo's.
So when I started to study the neurobiology of placebo, I was working with Parkinson patients.
We were in a very special setting, implantation of a deep brain stimulation to study patients
with Parkinson's who do not respond to the typical cocktail of anti-depressant Parkinson's drugs.
And the goal was to try to understand if during the surgical procedure, we can study the changes
occurring at the level of neurons when a patient expects to receive dopamine.
In particular, we were using a pomorfen that is a dopamine agonist.
So the goal was to try to understand if giving a placebo in a surgical room can produce a
change at the level of neurons.
And in a blind, counter-balance way, patient receive in a subcutaneous part of their arm
and injection of the placebo.
And we were recording from the other part of the setting without hearing the time of
injection, the neuronal changes occurring together with the injection of this placebo.
And as a neurophysiologist, together with the surgeons and colleagues that were neurologists,
we were recording under the cells changing the spike.
So when you see something changing in the brain because a patient receives an injection
of a placebo, you understand the power of the mind.
So there is something that is not merely philosophy or something that we read in a narrative book.
It's really a link between the neurobiology, our ability to change the response, treatment,
and what we call the neurobiology of the effects.
Importantly, we don't need to necessarily placebo to study placebo effects.
Today, we know that there are many different treatments that we have been using in clinical
setting to explore how this power of the mind can somehow either amplify the response to
what treatment, for example, an event, an opioid or another drug like ketamine.
And we also have either an increase of the benefit, like people experience larger analgesic
effects, larger antidepressant or production of unsighted.
But some other patients responding up paradox a way like Catherine main mentioned in her
book, where we see a worsening of this symptom.
So then you understand that studying the placebo phenomenon can be quite complex.
So we have patients that receive a placebo and they respond to the benefit.
Patients who receive an activity treatment like an opioid and they respond as if it was
a super drug magic.
I told a patient we use the same treatment, a placebo for pain therapeutic or antidepressant,
no matter what we do, they don't respond.
So that is a little bit to what make me interested in leading my team at the University of Maryland
in exploring these phenotypes of placebo effects.
So we are last clinicians, physicians, psychotherapists.
We know that there is something relevant about this interaction with our patients that trigger
the sort of interesting phenomenon for which patient improve.
But what are these kinds of things and why eventually they occur?
And the big question is why some patient do respond and some other patient respond minimally
but not told with a sort of a
fight to people on clinical extinct gestpping and a kind of modification of sleep, how
for which things. So is it generalizable? Are there some patients with their due or don't respond?
Or I can imagine there being sort of a variety of phenotypes of how much based on what factors
etc. I mean, I think it's so complicated because there's so many factors that drive placebo response.
For years we've focused on learning, conditioning and expectation as a key driver and certainly they
are. But now we know several genes that modify response to placebo treatment, not necessarily a
placebo effect. These genes might be associated with just the natural history of the condition.
So for instance, one of the genes we study is a gene that breaks down dopamine. And so we
hypothesize that people with high dopamine because the enzyme that the gene codes for doesn't work
as well, that the people who had more dopamine would be placebo responders. And we did indeed find
that. But is that person always a placebo responder? Can I tell them that, you know,
they're a placebo responder and change their placebo response? Can I tell them something
not harmfully negative, but something like, oh, this doesn't work very well. And can I get from
them a more powerful negative response, which we call a nocebo response? So are they just
labile, suggestible people? Or is this in the context of the condition that we studied in that
case, it was IBS that in the context of IBS, these people are a placebo responder. One question that
we like to think about is if I do a clinical trial and depression, and I find this set of people with
the responders to placebo in depression, if I put them and many people have comorbidities,
so this is not an unlikely scenario, if I put them in a hypertensive trial for an anti-hypertension
drug, would they be placebo responders there? And so I think there's so many questions,
and it's such a rich and fascinating field that I think we're only beginning to scratch the surface.
Indeed, and to start to address these questions, what we are doing,
gathering myself and many others in the era of research, bring these questions back to the lab,
and we somehow try to study each component. So we use script randomize, we create the largest
so far database of patients with temporary vulnerability disorder funded by the National
Institute of Dental Chronic Fashion Research, where data is of over 800 patients that come
and came to the lab to try to understand the ease of irritable pain related to placebo,
do sex interfere, and sex and race interfere with placebo-responsiveness.
How long a placebo response can last? And for example, what we published recently is that
severe irritable pain, number of years of temporary vulnerability,
Ebola pain, this electronic disease, emerging, affecting many young people, and with many other
pain comorbidities, IBS, low-back pain, fobrumia, this patient responded to placebo,
no matter how many years they had TMD, no matter how severe is their pain.
And sometimes the response to that to VC to placebo is huge, like 8 out of 100 on a scale from 0 to 100
for pain severity, but also we observe that sex make a difference. Women tend to be
characterized by larger placebo effects. And this is another fascinating topic where
the neuroscience and neurobiology of sex difference is contributing to understand
why eventually women show larger placebo effects, which are the mechanism.
And another aspect that we are focusing on, we published already, race.
Racial differences make a difference again. We are in a special city, Baltimore, that allow us to study
a diverse population. We have over 35% of the patients who are Afro-Americans.
So we have situations and white people. When we compare Afro-Americans with white, again,
we see that Afro-Americans have less placebo responses. We are diving into that now to try to
understand this related to genes. Is this related to the severity of the pain that somehow is larger
than white? Because we have less access to better income and health care. So it is fascinating to see
that we think about placebo as a difficult topic because as always this complexity, but at the same
time we can study part by part, the placebo response. So I would just add cultural factors also.
So there's a large literature shows that people's response to pain and their expression of pain.
What they feel is how much you can talk about how much pain you have are shaped by culture.
So friends, there were studies that showed that this was a number of years ago. You know,
Italians had lower quote, lower pain thresholds that given the same amount of pain to people of
different ethnicities. Italians would report higher levels of pain, for instance, and some
other groups and other groups, less like Scandinavians, less, etc. And so I think the feeling was it was
more how stoical one wants to be in, or the culture encourages one to be versus how expressive,
or how expressive people feel they're able to be factors like that. So I've looked at that
literature number of years, but I think those may be factors as well, and that may play a role in
some of this. Well, we had the contribution of Daniel Mormon, an anthropologist from the
University of Michigan, who has the first one to say, hey guys, here the anthropological part,
cultural part, sorry, European and Americans made the fear in the response to tablets versus
injections. And that is fascinating. And again, in this large court of patients that we are studying
and they're very kind because we invite them several times to the lab. And a lawyer to our
studies, we started to explore how a cultural background, if they were, you know, some of Italians,
Asians, Chinese, or Americans, how this may change the placebo effects. I can't say too much because
we are working and we didn't publish that. But the results show that there are strong cultural
components that modulate placebo effects again. Well, I was in Zurich for four years, excuse me,
Catherine, I'll just add that to that. And of course, in Switzerland, you have the French Swiss,
the German Swiss, the Italian Swiss, and the Romanish. And in the doctors, in the delivery
departments, they could tell you who was from which part of Switzerland, and they were all Swiss
by the amount of expressiveness and the arias and the laments that were coming from the different
rooms. So I wonder if it's really pain thresholds or really the cultural permission to to express
it and sing it all. But what felt to be appropriate? Yeah. Well, but then also as part of the complex
theory, there's that affective response, let's call it a primary response of the patient in the
face of their symptom. And then that fits into the ecology of their relationship with their
doctors, because their affect of expression influences their doctors responsiveness, and may
create a certain acceptance of the doctor's advice or not. You can imagine all sorts of
various things. Let's bring it back to this, Catherine, because for pain,
pressure to pain tolerance, we know that the genes play a role. African Americans, again, have a
lower in threshold. And we know that this difference is linked to several genetic variants and differences.
Certainly. And you do see differences in the distribution of some of those variants in
different populations by race and ethnicity. But you know, I just was reading a paper.
There are many, many studies now that are trying to predict who the placebo responder is, right?
Obviously, they want to do it because in clinical trials, you can either take out your placebo
responders or analyze your data a little bit differently. In so many clinical trials are failing,
so it's a big problem. But what's really fascinating is if you look across all the studies, and there
been several, starting with just looking at personality alone, looking in the big five for,
you know, whether extraversion or openness or agreeableness are associated with placebo response.
The data is all over the place. I think you could probably argue that you often see extraversion
and openness associated with placebo response. But it was clear that that was too blunt an
instrument to really understand who a placebo responder was. And then you have the neuroimagers
who did really elegant work and found, you know, either it's a right middle frontal
gyrus was associated with placebo response in, you know, in chronic knee pain. But there wasn't
a lot of crossover across all these different studies. And you would have thought that despite
the heterogeneity in all these studies, if there was a placebo response signature that it would,
you know, emerge fast forward to the last, you know, five years machine learning has
allowed us to put the kitchen sink in and to ask, you know, like, if we combine demographic,
psychological measures, neuroimaging measures, genetics, what emerges and what's amazing is
you get different things in different conditions and different, you know, types of cohorts.
As to where the computer the computer start to have a lot of pain. Is that what you mean?
Yeah. Or how the computers feel about it. Right. Yeah. Oh, yeah.
It's eventually this would be the direction to create the consortium where we would have
big data. Yeah. To integrate. Yeah. I'm sorry for interrupting. So what was the outcome of that?
The one that blew me away was for depression that the level of education
was the only thing that robustly predicted your placebo response. And I wonder if you can guess
which way it went. It wasn't. But educated. It would be fixed. Exactly. In fact, in fact,
the more educated you were, your placebo response was so strong that it was greater than your
antidepressant response. Yeah. You would be protected. This makes me go, I want to go back to this
idea about dopamine and dopamine metabolism and expectation because of course those two were
often linked together. Anticipation, expectation and dopamine. And I'm wondering, because I feel
strongly that those mechanisms play a large role in human consciousness and maybe distinguishes
humans from other organisms, I'm wondering, I have to think you're going to tell me what I expect
here. My expectation is there's not a great animal model for placebo response.
It's not true. I mean, I don't have to. Yes. I'm happy to hear him wrong.
There are studies of placebo in rodents. And how can we create a placebo response in mice or rats
or other animals? Well, we use conditioning. We expose animals to medication that can be, for
example, rapid action antidepressant like ketamine. And we expose mice to ketamine for three weeks,
two weeks apart. And ketamine inducing mice reduction of anhedonia, they start to move more,
they start to be more active after we use of course the sense of reduction of the model.
And when we replace ketamine, together with my correlates from psychiatry here,
in the mouse model with a placebo, we observe a ketamine like response in mice,
suggesting that this open up a new era of research where we can start going up to an
genetic molecular basis of a placebo response even as when we engage more people to study
animal models for placebo. I think we then can really understand more and more about
this phenomenon. The beauty is that animal responded to placebo. And of course, we can't tell them
this drug is powerfully or fully well spent just because we don't know their language is our
limitation. So, but definitely we can use learning mechanism and conditioning to create
a condition at the response and placebo effects. It has been known as the showing pain with both
acute pain and neuropathic pain. We are the someone in my lab who recently finished our PhD
who study fentanyl in rats with a model of trigeminal pain, again, to explore a placebo effect in rats.
And Catherine, in the studies that you were mentioning, do you tell the patients that they're
receiving a placebo? And I'm interested in what the ethic is of whether you tell a patient or not.
And Robert, you must have put a great deal of thought into this. So, could you give us a sense
of that? Yeah, there's a whole new field or of course nothing is new. If you go back in the
literature, you'll see it pretty early on where it's called open label placebo therapy,
where you tell the patient that it's a placebo and strikingly, and I think about 10 studies now,
they're small studies, we've seen pretty impressive effects when people actually get better. But the
key thing here is think about it, right? Firstly, the assumption that if you're on the active
therapy that you're going to get better is what creates the biases, what creates the
expectation is what creates the placebo effect. So, if you change the script, so you tell the
patient what I call the truth about placebos, which is that placebos work sometimes in 33% of
people that some people who've taken placebos have gotten better and they've gotten better for
quite a long time. Let's try the placebo in you and let's see how you respond. That's a very different
thing from saying, I'm really sorry, but you might get randomized to drug or you might get
randomized to placebo. So, it's creating a realistic but positive expectation about
placebo can actually influence the outcome. And we've seen now in IBS, in depression, in chronic
low back pain, in several conditions that are functional pain syndromes, you can see this
enhanced placebo response with open label placebo. What's interesting is you don't see it in wound
healing and you don't see it in places where you wouldn't expect to see it. You know,
placebos don't work to fight COVID. Placebos don't work to fight cancer. I mean, they might
reduce your stress or they might help you feel better, but they're not going to stop the
cells from spreading. I would say ethically, and there's a number of interesting ethical
questions here that come up. So, the physicians, I think, should not knowingly deceive patients,
right? Patients have a right to know what they're getting, what's involved, etc. That being said,
obviously, patients may benefit simply from quote the placebo effect of, you know, here is
something that might help you. I think, and studies have shown that about half of doctors say that
they give placebos. Interestingly, there are variations also by geographic region in the United
States. So, doctors in the South are 50% more likely to say they give placebos to their patients
than doctors in the Northeast or the Midwest, etc. But I think what happens is my own view is that a
lot of holistic medicine draws on the placebo effect, reflexive placebo effect. Vitamins, for
instance, for the average American, I think, are largely, I would argue, in part, the placebo effect,
at least for many, many people. Why do you argue that, Robert? I'm just curious, and I hate to cut
you off, but I really just think, I want to ask you to explain the basis of thinking that vitamins
are placebos. Let me first finish the point that I'll answer your question like that.
So, my overall point on that is that they're over-the-counter holistic remedies that are sold
that I think work, people say they work. And I think a lot of that for many, many people is
like placebo effect. And so, I think what doctors can do ethically, and that's your question
betterly, is rather than saying, I'm going to deceive you, give you a placebo effect, and say
it's a real something, I think doctors can say things like, you know, many patients benefit from
over-the-counter remedies, from vitamins, etc. And to answer your question, Katherine,
data show that the percent of people who actually have vitamin deficiencies is very, very low.
So, not more than a handful of percent of Americans actually have vitamin deficiencies.
And so, the data, as I understand it, on the use of many men, now, when I say, I should say a few
things, one is they're placebos and placebos, and we mean different things like placebos, right?
So, that the whole discussion, what we mean by placebos. Over-the-counter holistic medicine,
we mean many, many things. Certainly, there are some people who have vitamin deficiencies,
but the average person who takes a multivite, my understanding of the data shows that they
don't have a vitamin deficiency. Just if you look statistically, there's certainly a huge
percent of people who take a multivite vitamin C, for instance. My understanding is the data shows
that, except for the placebo effect, vitamin C probably does not have an effect on the common
cold, but we like the placebo effect. Obviously, there is, you know, people of anemia, etc.
may have folate, other B12 efficiencies, etc. But I think for a lot of vitamins out,
vitamin C, a lot of things. And certainly, if you look on their various TV shows, drink raspberry
juice. This is going to help cure your cancer. There's a lot of over-the-counter remedies for
which I think there are, there is, I would say, it's basically a placebo effect for people who feel
that it's helpful. Obviously, St. John's War, there are acupuncture. I think there's studies that
show that it may have some effectives, etc. But I think there's a lot of holistic treatments out there
that where the placebo effect is, is what's going on. And I think that those are things that a lot
of doctors can have their patients take. That will or encourage that might be helpful for instance.
It's a different process. Something we are talking about,
about 10 years ago, we all realized that many physicians prescribe vitamins and antibiotics
and antidepressant. And this is documented in the literature as a tool to evoke placebo responses.
And this is, you know, from a professional and medical point of view. Of course,
not right. So we realized that many treatments are merely suggested or prescribed to make
to placebo patients or to make patients respond because of the power of placebo effects.
On the other hand, we are talking about open label placebo. That is a sort of
new trend, I would say, where patients are, you know, deliberately informed you are receiving
placebo. There is a battle with a label placebo and they are told, many patients respond to
placebo, you can try to use placebo. And the reason why we started this line of research,
that the capture from many other people, although it was initiated in 1963 by Parske and other
people at Johns Hopkins, was to challenge the idea that we need deceptive framework, deception
to induce a placebo response. In a sort of, you know, challenging way as a scientist, we were
sitting on a round at a balance, a what if we tell patients that is a placebo and we tell them
please take placebo for two months. There is no deception. There are no theoretical problems
because we are not giving line to antibiotics vitamin in place of, you know, to elicit a placebo response.
The only way to try to understand the pain depression, the brain, it is ADHD,
low back pain, and a cunning rule when patients are told you're taking a placebo.
Yeah, I would say, if I may. Yeah. And that's specific, connected to what
Luana said, but more with what Catherine said, are you saying that the etiology of the disease
has something to do with whether there is a placebo response or not? In other words, you said for
COVID or for cancer, there will be very unlikely a placebo response, whereas for depression, for
example, and you said IBS also, there will be. Yes, I think that we you want to distinguish between
a placebo response and a placebo effect of the having a placebo response. So you can't necessarily
control the response that patient will have. The question is whether or not that response will
be effective to minimize or treat the disease that you have. So from what we know,
placebos can dial down the areas of your brain that are activated in pain, for instance,
and dial up the areas that are associated with expectation that can kind of
downward regulate the pain coming up and basically tell you you're feeling less pain.
So that I mean, I think a lot of what we're learning about placebos is very focused in the brain.
Number one, and number two, along the lines of what Luana just said with conditioning,
you can condition ketamine, you can immunosuppress, conditioned people to be immunosuppressed,
you can condition them to have several biological functions that you wouldn't think of or related
to the brain. So in that way, you could modify disease with conditioning and placebo, but for
the large part, we don't really think that a placebo response, whether it's autonomic,
whether it's immunologic, whether it's endocrine, or whether it's in the brain, is going to stop a
virus from replicating in your body and doing what viruses do. So I think from that,
perspective, we don't think that placebos are effective treatments, and we certainly saw in what
we what transpired in the last year and a half that no matter how much we wanted some drugs,
no matter how much we believed say that chloroquine might be effective in effective treatment for
cloning. People with high expectation might have thought like that would drive the effect of
chloroquine, but it just couldn't fight the effect of the virus.
And I would say too, I think that those conditions in which for instance stress or pain or it might
be seen as somewhat more subjective symptoms are involved. I think they have more placebo
response also, but that extends to I would argue even things like cancer, for instance,
placebos could have an effect. I think because we know that anxiety and depression,
right, you're affected by placebo's can in fact also exacerbate your harm,
immune system and heroin's immune system and exacerbate things like cancer. So it may be that
there are even you know, more medical diseases may also be affected through those kinds of mechanisms.
I think that's I think the aspects if we think about ourness of symptoms. So if we think about pain,
unless you have a genetic disease for which you can't experience pain, you know what pain can be
or good mood or a larger reaction or itching or fatigue from cancer, any symptom that we can
perceive consciously and we have ourness of we can modify with verbal suggestions and expectations.
But if I tell you your cortisol is going to increase, you don't know what is cortisol increase,
or if I tell you your interlocking six is increasing and you have information,
what IL6 increases means to us. So we can't change things that we can't access consciously
with verbal suggestion with the power of our beliefs. But if we do a conditioning like the
mouse model that I mentioned before, we can change the release of IL6 interferon and many other
circumstances in the body. I was about to say that the the it seems to me that the nervous system
on one hand and then the immune system on the other, which are both very complex,
probably the two most complex components of our our biologys are the sorts of areas where placebo
effects can make a difference and it's interesting that they do process more let's say than maybe
the lining of your stomach might let's say they do process I mean of course the lining of your
stomach also processes information in some sense, but you know not in a way that I think
information of in the immune system does speaking of the stomach and interleukins,
there was a really fascinating article out of nature about two weeks ago talking about IBS
and this problem of the patient who develops a lot of pain after almost every meal. And it's
interesting because I think it ties into a lot of both no SIBO and placebo issues and namely a lot
of these folks who suffer from chronic pain from meals go through the trouble of trying to isolate
what it is in their diet that might be causing the problem they'll remove gluten or they'll remove
meat or the you know and a lot of these folks end up in this the article reflected there some of
them end up chasing their tail because they just simply don't seem to be able to identify what it
is that's causing their trouble you know they'll rotate diets and so forth very carefully and
come up with nothing and in this study with which was which was in rats they found a mass cell
release that was unique in the in the rats who had their that model of sort of post-prandial after
meal pain disorders and so then along with that the release of these interleukin the inflammatory
cytokines and they found that blocking that effect reduced it and so but what what happened in the
fact is that speaking of the stomach having its own information processing that somehow the release
of the mass cells was in response to it was tagged almost any meal they happened to just have
so it's almost like the mass cells started to associate itself with with the meal of the day
let's say and created created a response that they could they could block with the appropriate
agents very interesting because it could have been a no seabec conditioning kind of going back
to what loana was saying you could imagine that there could have been an incidental
coupling between something somebody ate and pain something somebody ate and pain and now you get
this generalized effect and so it's almost as if cognitive behavioral therapy or some other
you know non-chemical intervention is what is this call for? I wanted to ask one more thing about
if I understand correctly in the classical placebo experiment the classical way placebo is used
the person doesn't know that there he or she's taking placebo in the open label they know they're
taking placebo the second one becomes very close to suggestion and becomes close to you know what
we're used to doing the old days hypnotic suggestion and just suggestion whereas the first one the
person is not really getting any suggestion of any kind they think they're just taking the
medication unless they consider the medication itself a suggestion so I wondered what the thought
is about that well I think the first case also has suggestion if I say this is a medication I'm
going to give you for your fill in the blank depression or Parkinson's or something else you're
thinking it's going to help me and ethically there is there is a literature about a concept
called therapeutic misconception which is it turns out that even when in research we tell people
look you may be on placebo of a coin is flipped you know or whatever well you ask people how is it
that it was decided that you're going to get this drug that you're now getting this this would
it kill you're taking they'll say well the doctor's side that's what's best for me so I think for
most people when they see someone in a white coat in a hospital give them something even if they know
it's 50 percent chance it's placebo they will think it's being chosen to make themselves better so I
think those kinds of expectations get set. Absolutely are different kinds of expectations I mean in
the context of randomized clinical trials we know that we introduce this concept of therapeutic
misconception to account for the desire to get better the desire to contribute to advanced science
and the open label placebo is something intriguing because we tell patient is a placebo and we think
that merely taking up he'll make contribute to a sort of condition and response where patient or
daughter don't have specific beliefs or I may get 50% of the patients that are in the active arm
for this trial you know with that the expectation to 0% of getting an active drug you just receive
the placebo and probably the action of taking appeal may trigger a condition at the response again
because we know what is the action of a pain therapeutic and subconsciously but I'm very
carefully using this term we may trigger body responses that we learned through our life I bet
if we provide the open placebo to children that didn't have yet the experience of being treated
may have a different meaning unless we say last sentence you know so again there is the complexity
of our cognitive functions in interacting with our body response and this connection you know at
the level of autonomic system brain system and in system that can help to understand the variety
of the benefits though I would just I would just add to that quickly that I think some of it may
also be due to the ecology people are feeling helpless and going to a doctor's office even if
they're told this is a placebo you know I went and saw the doctor he said I'm not dying of cancer
you know he seemed or she seemed hopeful I think those kind of interactions may be part of why
an open label placebo may work is you know the doctor listened to me there was a connection he
likes me or she likes me is a relationship I mean I think those elements perhaps I play a role
I also wonder about that and I'm sorry quickly in Ted Kaptrix in both of the recent studies or not
one is not so recent on IBS where people on the wait list so you're not getting any placebo at all
had a 30% improvement compared to people who got sham acupuncture who had like a you know 40%
improvement and people who got the sham acupuncture because the plus the warm caring interaction got
62% of them had an improvement so just you know signing up to be asked questions and give and
give blood can be very therapeutic I know sorry I wanted to experience being a clinical trial as
a patient myself so I signed up for a trial for insomnia and I was so excited about it I was
driving to work and I thought well when I get more sleep I'm gonna call my brother more I'm
gonna call my system more I'm gonna be such I'm gonna be such a better person and I'm thinking
all this and then I'm like driving you know I'm in traffic and I said wow I could I'm just gonna
call my brother right now so I called him and he was like where are you calling me I'm like oh wow
I haven't even gotten in the trial yet already I'm done with my insomnia and ironically I never
got in the trial because I was you know I had I had too many exclusion criteria but um you got
cured and tell us I'm sleeping much better I you know what you started to say Catherine was a
great segue when you jumped in just a second ahead of me but I was thinking about something I
think is related this is when you mentioned that people in the wait list do better 30% of them do
better what I find in my practice because I see a lot of treatment refractory patients they've been
on a gazillion antidepressants typically and sometimes other meds but they've been on a gazillion
antidepressants one after the other after the other and they come to me and they're a wreck and I
typically try to in a careful way do a little bit of a washout you know take them off the meds
the as best I can and that often really helps a lot not always sometimes you have to build it back
up but my point is that I think some holistic treatments and I wonder whether this actually
occurs even in some placebo the placebo arm of some studies you know just removing people from
treatments that may have been having pernicious effects because people a lot of them are they're
they're looking for research help because they're they're refractory right so I wonder in how many
cases you've removed this I know firsthand a case that I saw of a woman with very severe depression
like I just described on lots of antidepressants for a couple of years just doing miserably and she
went away to some sort of holistic spa like place and they withdrew her from her meds and she did
really nicely and she thought it was all of the treatments they had provided to her including a
lot of holistic treatments and such and that may be that they helped I'm not that much of a
skeptic about it but I formed the idea that had to do with withdrawing her from the medicines
sure enough she had a recurrence of her depression and she went back and she didn't do very well
this time she went back taking no meds and arrived in a depressed state and she came to me and I
said look I think what happened was you got better largely because you weren't taking treatment
and they rid you of all those negative effects and now you've had a recurrence and we have to
you know get to work on it in a more active way and it worked it ended up working but so I'm wondering
how much we're moving those you know pain medicines for example when they don't work especially for
chronic pain and they typically don't very well they cause a wide range of horrible side effects
then that really reduces a person's body of life so I wondered about that I was going to ask my
wife Catherine Catherine your book the pain the placebo paradox Luanis I can imagine several
paradoxes we've been talking about one is the but I'd Luanna mentioned one early on in her
initial remarks about that some people placebo actually hurts them or something but is that
was I was wondering what is what is the paradox is that the paradox you're focusing on or others
or all of these there's so many what's the plural Beverly you might know the plural of paradox is
it paradox paradoxes paradoxes yeah there's so many for instance there is actually a thing called
the the placebo I think it's actually the the placebo paradox where people like if you do the
math on the difference between drug and placebo it it's supposed to be additive drugs and
placebuds are supposed to be additive but several people who don't respond to psychiatric meds
and who do respond to placebo basically mess up that math and so there's a like a formal term
called placebo paradox but I think the paradox there's so many paradoxes there is this paradox
of people who don't respond when we think they should respond there's the paradox of it should
be additive and and I apologize for jumping on you with the vitamins but that's kind of my
I'm passionate about vitamins and it's interesting I want to say why because I think of vitamins as
drugs vitamins are drugs that we were unable to demonstrate that they were better than placebo
in clinical trials but there's so many natural substances that when we purify them like you know
willow bark from the the tree that from bark from a willow tree is where we get aspirin for instance
statins are extracted from the mold like the green mold on your bread is is where we get
statin so there's so many of these natural products that are actually drugs when we purify them
and then we can demonstrate or actually a lot of them are grandfathered in but when you really try
and test you know vitamin E vitamin maybe not so much vitamin B vitamin C we can't see a difference
between drug and placebo but my work has shown that genetically there's subsets of people who respond
to vitamin E for instance and another subset that are harmed or I should say do worse with vitamin E
and then this subset that responds to vitamin E does worse on placebo and the subset that responds
to that does worse on vitamin E does worse on drugs so basically placebo basically they cancel
each other up is what I'm saying and so you never see this difference between these vitamins and
these drugs and I would argue that there's so many drugs now that if we took them back through
a modern day placebo trial they would probably fail and so you know I think that this is this
is an inherent paradox in how we understand and how we project onto what we think is real medicine
and what is actually you know holistic or is a vitamin or what we see as effective I think they're
the paradoxes everywhere if I can just respond to that great point thank you so
yeah so clearly there are strong pharmacological properties in many natural substances right so
you know lithium's assault and as you mentioned you know there is poisonous plants out there too
and and beneficial plants etc that being said you know the the holistic medicine
industry is a multi-billion dollar industry in this country if it's 10 or 20 billion dollars
and I think that for most people and you see you know natural vitamin stores etc etc I think for
certainly for a lot I would hypothesize for most but not for all patients who go in there what
they're coming out with is going to be more placebo effect or I would hypothesize would be a lot
of placebo effect not from whatever they're buying in the GMC vitamin store the natural
you know holistic medicine store that that actually it's a physiological effect but
I think the work you're doing it's to just tease these out is extremely important and
then look forward to seeing the results I wanted to ask also your opinion about
a specifically timely thing which is over my practice for the last couple of months the major
thing that people talk about in relation to their bodies is the effect of the vaccine on their
bodies some have absolutely no side effects some have very violent side effects do you think there
is an expectation factor in that or do you think it's an immune system issue well they may not be
separate though remember exactly yeah you're working on this right so you
have a representation and the side effects to the vaccine and also people who may not want
the vaccine there is the huge case in Europe of AstraZeneca just now so a
definitely the immune response and the way we responded to the same trigger in particular
the vaccine justify different experience of a side effects some people may be extremely fearful
anxious and this can amplify the perception of the side effects but also some people may
add the COVID and they may have an amplified the response to the vaccine because there is a memory
immunological memory to you know the SARC COVID-2 so it is quite complex but definitely we need to
you know be conscious to say well this is just in your mind you know many people are experiencing
severe side effects for this kind of vaccine and you know the difference in immune system genetics
and prior exposure to the virus through the disease justify a different amount of side effects
there's also a very complex statin related nocibel effect that's happening in popular culture right
now there's a belief certainly out there that statins cause muscle pain and several other side
effects and unfortunately I think that the press certainly has picked this up but also there are
what are called statin denialists and if you google statin side effects you get 10 million hits
10 million hits now there more recently people have done researchers have done clinical trials
where people who could never take a statin they took a statin in three weeks they had to come off
of them because they had such terrible pain they've randomized them so they're blinded they don't
know they're taking a statin and they've actually there's a type of trial design called n-1 trial
where you kind of you spend a month on a statin you spend a month on a placebo and a month with no
pills but you don't know what order you're getting or what you're getting obviously you know when
you're not going you're taking no pills but you don't know when you're taking a statin there when
you're taking a placebo and what they found was half of the people who went to the end of the study
were able to go back to taking a statin and when they looked at the distribution of side effects
there was no difference between when people had negative side effects with placebo versus when they
had with them with the statins so there's obviously you know there are people who have muscle pain
with with statins there's no question but there are a lot of people who have probably side effects
that are more nocebos and are induced by expectation and it's so hard to control back in the day you
could kind of say you the physician could tell the patient what to expect but now the worldwide
web tells us what to expect and you know it really depends what rabbit hole you go down and lord
knows when you go down one of these rabbit holes you get more and more you know the holes kind of
proliferate and you get further down and you get stuck and I think this is a tremendous harm to
so many people and very unfortunate I hope something is also for pain you know some people who
experience pain stop to most of to exercise stop to have a special life and this mechanism of fear
and anxiety becomes so dangerous and the same can be probably applied to the statin
in modern and nozibo responses where people respond with terrible muscle pain and again pain
and stop to take statins without considering that they expose themselves to the risk of heart attack
and strokes so yes definitely nozibo experience of the you know side effects like pain and
anxiety can become a sort of trigger to more negative spectators and nozibo
I would like to say this one thing because I think it's implied by almost everything that
we've said today but I think it bears emphasis I mean I know again as a clinician when I hear
and I hear a lot of complaints about a lot of symptoms and some of them even seem a little bit
hard for me to help for but I I never think of it as being I quote unquote in someone's mind I
always think there's some mechanism that's a physical mechanism that's accounting for this
whether or not it's based on their body's reaction to expectation or to some some incidental property
the drug that triggers a nozibo effect for example I'm I never think this is some sort of
mentalistic something in some mental realm alone I think of it as being something that's
triggered and I it's important to try to figure out why why why is this happening this person so
the important thing is that when we observe this negative behaviors negative expectation
negative outcomes it is much more difficult to erase and remove this kind of responses than
a placebo response positive outcome and we're studying the lab to why this happen which part
of the brain is involved but so probably from an evolutionary point of view we as human begin
tended to respond in a more aggressive way to negative events and this somehow help us to prevent
you know dangerous situations but when this become chronic of course it become part of the
disease that we have difficulty to handle at least from the symptomatology point of view
yeah there's a large literature on that of course on sort of you know Daniel Kahneman
you know won the Nobel Prize or discussing instead of you know biases when they have I just want
to mention two things just I first of all see there's a few questions coming from the audience
we may want to answer a bit but one thing I just want to come back to the notion something
Catherine said earlier about RCTs and the interest ethically to sort of not have people respond
up we'll see whoever placebo responders in clinical trials I think that raises some ethical concerns
so the read I think what you mentioned is and I think you're speaking about other drug companies
out there doing this there's a concern you know a lot of RCTs aren't working as you're saying
I would intend a lot of RCTs aren't working now but more did in the past not because there's
more placebo response in the world now that's not you were suggesting I know but because there
aren't as good drugs perhaps right and so the problem with eliminating placebo response in the
study is that in the world when the drug is in a proof there are in fact placebo responders so you
do in fact want to know how good a drug is if I say this is my new drug against placebo because
in the world that's what's going to happen out there so I just think that raises a few
questions in my mind is to put it out there um this I think this has a bearing it's not straight
on subject but there was just a report from Cambridge University study that LSD microdosing
is thought to have a large placebo effect do you have any opinion or knowledge about this
and I think after you're smiling I think after that we should go to the audience yes we will
briefly in the literature there is evidence that placebo responses in randomized clinical
trials are larger compared to what we observe 15 20 25 years ago and one of the reason is our
marketing we invest much more in marketing we are good in you know social media in coloring
our drug so I would be still optimistic on the drug development we do develop new drugs we do
well last physicians and scientists the problem of placebo response is becoming larger and larger
it's also because we do better with engaging in this therapeutic doctor patient relationship
and another thing that we don't do so well yet bring in the mechanism and the knowledge of
placebo effects into the randomized clinical prior methodology why do we use still as gold
standard the additive model that Catherine mentioned a little ago we have better tools we have better
designs and from our work where colleagues like following some other people who suggest
let's change the design of clinical trials the comparison between a placebo versus active drug
cannot be enough cannot be just you know the solution to say this drug works or not so we needed to
think in a more creative and you know smarter way how we design a clinical trial for this disease
because if we study immune system it's different than studying schizophrenia so and we still
play the same clinical trial design 20 disease no matter which is the etymology what we know
that we should go ahead but I want to say about pain that is my area of interest I mean we know
that there is a huge influence of expectations and still we don't measure expectation when we do
clinical trial we know that sex race influence the therapist race and sex or trialist make
any difference we know that genetic assets change so if we know all these things why want to we
start with a collection of saliva for DNA with you know powerful assessment of social
demographic prior experience of unsexful pain therapeutics and do a better job in design a clinical trial
and the count for the body and versus that at least do we know we don't think that yeah I think it's
I mean going back to the ethics and also to build on Moana it it's a very complex and troubling problem
I think that we are stuck on the double blind randomized placebo control trial and we do need
to rethink it but in looking at what people have proposed even fathers new methodology has hit
problems with demonstrating efficacy being more effective than the typical randomized clinical
trial so it's not a simple problem to solve and I do think the ethics that that Robert can raise
is super important because think about it what are we going to give the placebo responders are we
not going to give them drugs are we going to say like are we going to give them placebos and I think
this is mostly disconcerting and troubling for instance in the area of surgery recently there
have been a number of clinical trials in surgery where they've actually usually surgery surgeons
for I mean I don't even know how long you know decades scores of decades have been they haven't had
to do randomized trials but now you know whether it's it's vertebral plasty or renal derivation or
you know or otroscopic surgery like all these are having problems demonstrating efficacy beyond
placebo but here's the problem if we say yeah if we say that that this procedure that we've been
doing for you know decades does not be placebo so we're not going to do it are we going to give
people a sham surgery I mean I don't think it's it's such a complex problem I think that we really
need to think through the whole thing from whether or not the genetics to what the genetics
yeah it's not the ethical consideration of the ethics of the surgical procedure and clinical trial
with sham surgery ethics of open label placebo ethics of randomized clinical trials I would
just say they are the problem with sham surgery especially people put under anesthesia in it general
anesthesia is there's risk yeah so ideally just to put it out there brainstorm if there's some way
to give a placebo that had no risk and obviously there are some things to decide are there placebo
responders who've just responded to surgery because of the placebo effect in which case could there
be something that's risk-free etc just as a thought let's try something who are similar why don't we
explain patient there is no evidence that this treatment is better than sham do you still want
to go through the sham or do you want to go to Edwards and they will explain you more about the
placebo effect that's great moment I just want to say one thing I'm I recently had rotator cuff
surgery and that was a one of the surgeries that they had this you know big uproar about it was
the most painful experience I've ever had and I would probably pick the surgery and that's surprising
to me but it's true it was a pain I know I think my shoulder works really well now and you know I
think somehow I don't know if I could have gotten there with physical therapy because I don't know if
I would have had the discipline without the surgery to do the physical therapy but you know we're all
complex beings yep and on that note I want to thank you for your incredible exchange here and
let the audience in there have been several questions that have come up and Alex will you moderate
that part yeah okay so excuse me first question is from dr. Diane garland thank you Diane so she
was wanting to why don't you guys reflect on the popularity of hydroxychloroquine
and I've immectant in treatment of covid despite lack of scientific evidence I know you brush
on it slightly so if there's anything more you want to add on to that topic I would just say that
when people feel helpless they grasp its draws and want something that's going to make them feel
better people don't like the sense of being helpless being depressed to spare etc and so people will
gravitate to something one and secondly what we haven't talked about is you touch on a little bit is
how politics and political biases affect perceptions of these issues which I think is a factor
so literally and initially the drug was introduced in a daughter without having grand clinical trials
so somehow we ran away as people to the active drug and placebo to come to the evidence that
there was no indication for this treatment the covid-19 pandemic was a very difficult situation
to underland you know there was an attempt to try different therapeutic solutions now today we have
better answers after one year and the therapeutic protocols for covid-19 have changed as a result
of clinical trials with a placebo arm I think there's also there's also a a a pernicious sort of anti
medicine narrative out there that goes something like this doctors don't really want to look at
certain evidence because that's not the way they're trained and they are biased against certain
approaches that's sort of a little bit of the that storyline came a little bit into our previous
president's narrative about hydrochloroquine you know that doctors didn't really you know
weren't taking these anecdotal reports seriously and sure they sure should why they being so
pigheaded about it that was a sort of part of the negative narrative I would say that
reporters in situation like this have also a responsibility to educate lay language people
you know to remember faces and solid knowledge is the dog models and a amount media spread example
that can convey false information okay on the next one okay um so this is a question I have
the formulate for this commenter on youtube and I'm only speaking with this level of disrespect
towards him because he showed no respect to any of you and so I think he brings up some points but
I just want to point out that to listen to this for an hour or so and to then come to the conclusion
that none of the people here know what they're talking about and that they have no model that
satisfies you I think is um I think show us more about you this is you're a professional medical
you know your medical professional dr kenith carcia I did more work looking into you than you've done
it to any of these people and some of the foremost question for you because you seem unwilling
and are able to do this and I think also to use buzzwords in either no context or even with the
context you provide that shows that your model is just as simple or even stupid I think um
I'm always saying this because of what he wrote and I think it's you're a grown person
you can write a question out without resorting to these insults and so that being said um
well move on well look let's just try to bring in some of the concepts he brought up because
maybe you can reflect on it in a way that with the proper context so he was curious about the effects
of complex social theory on the placebo effect and then he talks about CNS hierarchy central
nervous system hierarchy and nonlinear processing and with regards to effects of placebo so do you
have guys have any comments to give there so you could satiate is obviously complex model that exceeds
our human experience you know go ahead complex social theory yeah loana do you want to talk about
I mean I think there are very there are some very sophisticated models that are emerging and are
very interesting um one of them is the Bayesian brain or predictive error processing and um
um uh some of this work um is basically building on um work that's being done in neurobiology not
only in placebo research um that is about our brain tending to predict before um predict what
it's going to see or experience um and then taking the information from the experience and
basically integrating or averaging that um information to create the experience that we actually experience
um and so some of this predictive the Bayesian brain theories have been applied to placebos
in particular for instance into open to open labeled placebo to say that um that you know we have a
preconceived notion of what to expect when we get a pill um the new information that's coming in
to say like this pill is a placebo but you might want to try it and then there's this kind of
synthesis of these two in which the person might re reinterpret an experience of feeling better
because you know our symptoms are going are basically fluctuating over time so for instance if in a
moment that I take the pill I'm like oh I'm actually feeling better than I might revise my prior um and
have a new hypothesis of how I'm feeling and that might get revised continually to the point where
I'm having a quote unquote placebo response that's ameliorative or positive and Luana is a much
more of a neurobiologist than me and might want to comment on this you know these theories that are
in the field now again I like to refer to animal models the reason why we can study a placebo
responses in animals is because we somehow can simplify the placebo effect to a prediction of
future events so if we are receiving a treatment and we try we I mean in this case our brain as
a great machine to make predictions we may predict based on our experience like this person is
offensive because doesn't know this topic to the extent that we know we are predicting a behavior
or we can predict a reduction of pain if we experience positive and artistic effects in our life so
so it is complex when we apply vision modeling in general to symptoms but there is an
enforce by different labs to use the prior experience current experience and expectation
to predict positive effects and the different kind of modeling not just the patient can be used
to anticipate if a person eventually based on different elements that they mentioned
can be a placebo responder or not to amplify a little bit on what Luana and Catherine just said
in terms of in terms of the brains organization or reorganization this actually dovetails a little
bit into Beverly's question that none of us took a whack at yet I'm ready to talking about LSD
microdosing but there's this notion that the brain of course and this again follows up on
Catherine's comment there it has a sort self-organization as a property of reorganizing itself
I mean in the old days I think this was what motivated in my mind anyway were motivated early
late 19th century German Gestalt psychology research where the brain tended to create holes
you know holes that the brain and our bodies do create these sort of self-organized states
and the Bayesian model says okay right through a series of iterations our brains reorganize and
occasionally it might incorporate a medication that pushes the biology of the brain in that direction
it might involve thinking and expectation that does that the idea behind a psilocybin LSD
treatment is that when it is supposed to work in as much as it helps to reorganize the way the brain
has sort of wrapped itself around the world around reality and by giving it a shake and
sort of a reboot your brain can reorganize and you can be happy and not want to use drugs anymore
or not have other sorts of psychological symptoms the study out of it was the Imperial College of
London found that in the micro dosing of an ametta analysis the micro dosing of LSD seemed to be
pretty much matched with the placebo response in the same studies but it remains to be seen of
course the dosing could be changed it might mean maybe it shouldn't be micro dosing
I'm a little bit skeptic of it but I think it's an interesting theory that does touch on this notion
of the reorganization of the brain okay and I apologize I meant to say complex systems theory
anyway but I only did this because I gave him a chance and I thought it was still try to get to
these topics because I think they could add something um but anyway uh so the next question is from
Dr Ralph Wharton thank you Ralph and they were curious about um the kind like hypnosis so you know
about they they cloped that 30% of all patients are easily hypnotizable so how do you think
hypnotism and placebo relate to one another?
I think there are studies comparing the brain imaging responses to hypnosis and
placebo and it looks like the two works through different mechanisms
again when we explore the brain responses we may see different mechanism for things that from
a syntomatologic or behavioral point of view looks like something similar so hypnosis is
strongly related to the sugestibilita how much people can be suggestible
there are studies that somehow show placebo responder tended to be also more suggestible
but whether when we look at the brain things can change and there you know
hypnosis versus placebo responses the two seems to work through different mechanism at least
when we talk about pain. Dr Wharton will be a discussant in our stress round table in April
so thank you for the question.
Um it's okay I go on to the next one so this is sort of two birds with one stone because uh
sharing gold and jostlin Diaz asked questions in a similar vein but I think put them together
they can be quite interesting so Sharon asks is religion slash belief that god will make it
it being you'll fill in the blank better the ultimate placebo and then jostlin in a similar vein
asks do you believe that spirituality plays a part in one's illness and care and that do you
believe that one can receive more activist cures through dreams. I think there's a few questions
there so I think there's no doubt that data shows that quote religiosity that spirituality can
help reduce stress and can assist coping with many conditions and there's been some data and
my colleagues on the call may know it better than I do that it can help with
uh healing etc. I think one difference is that for many people religion and spirituality involve
social supports also so people will if traditionally people go to a church or a temple there are
other people and that's I think some of that may work by having social support people care for
you knowing that people care for you etc. So those are some initial thoughts. There's also
Myrna Weisman's group at Yale and that was at Yale now she said Columbia for a number of years
shows that there's actually differences in the the the cortex among people in resiliency to
depression those who are uh uh have some religiosity it could just be spirituality without religion
per se that there's actually differences in the cortex associated with that that may be involved.
So somehow we can compare again sorry for my uh approach that is very you know by neuro biological
based if we exercise eventually we have the ability to increase structure the area for example related
to the hippocampus if we meditate we also do an exercise of our mind and something in the brain
changes a matter of doing this daily exercise spirituality is somehow different than placebo
effects we are talking about two different things placebo effects is somehow our expectation about
receiving a treatment and perceiving an outcome improvement spirituality is more related to
our beliefs or fate how much you believe in something that is independent than the process
that we would describe as placebo effects today.
David I think the first thing I think this approach I does is it gives people a sense of meaning and
hope also so I think the notion of hope may be a commons-enormated potentially.
And it also addresses the emotions with music and ritual and sort of costume and celebration so
that that you know stimulates some kind of sense of really having experience
which is what many people mean when they say something meaningful am I really having an experience?
I do think that there are ritualistic elements of you know the clinical encounter the physician
is wearing a white coat they're wearing a you know might have a stethoscope they do you know
they there's you know there's the opening line how are you doing what brings you here today there's a
very ritualized aspect to it so I haven't studied this Lohanna so I don't know like you know your
brain on spirituality versus your brain on placebo what the differences are but I do think that there
are you know even the kind of the host in communion you know is this kind of disc that you get
handed and you put on your tongue I mean there's a there's a lot of the format of a religious
experience that I think is kind of replicated in in a clinical setting and I don't think this is
unusual I mean you know our brains are economical organs and it's not making a new pathway for
every single different experience it's kind of funneling experiences generally into into these
set pathways so I wouldn't be surprised if there was more you know overlap but obviously very
difficult to study in the kind of acute setting that we study placebo's in.
Thank you. How many more questions are we feeling?
I think we should go another five minutes if that's all right.
Okay so I'll just because there's one more question from someone who hasn't asked yet and
then the rest are sort of second questions so I'll at least do that and we'll see where we are
from there so this is from Darwin a Gugo Rayas apologies if I bungled your last name this was
from YouTube he wrote is there a comprehensive list of quote unquote domains that are placebo
responsive or open label placebo responsive?
There are several papers we try to summarize what has been published so far in our
review and we describe the methodological challenges and direction of open label studies
or whether all these studies have been with an end that is quite limited to try to start to
address questions of phenotypes of people who responded to open label placebo we will need
the larger studies and before we draw any conclusion about who are the people who may respond to
an undisceptive open label placebo.
So we made some comments earlier about whether or at least I did about how whether immune
and CNS diseases may be at least among the things where there's more of response but not
exclusively and I also know that within psycho within the realm of sort of psychotropic meds
there are there's a lower placebo response to OCD as far as I know in most studies and
and also to psychosis and it's not complete but there's a lesser response that's been pretty
consistent. But we say overall also I mean the diseases conditions for which there are placebo
responses I think within mental health disorders there's a disproportionate number and I think part
was Luana's comments earlier that it's when one's not so mind how we define that is a layer of
the symptoms there may be more of an effect. Well this has been a wonderfully rich exchange I
really thank you all for participating and I hope that your communal experience here is having more
than a positive placebo effect but if it's only placebo effect of talking to others with the same
interests I'm happy that we could provide some of it and how much you provided for us.
So thank you very much. Thank you for having us. Oh yes thank you. That's wonderful. Thanks
everybody. Thank you.
you
you
