I wanted to know what was an address in the movie was what is the relationship between
the Higgs and the unification of the nuclear weak force and the electromagnetic force?
The standard model incorporates the unification of the two.
The Higgs is part of that, so at the very basis of the standard model, we need to have
the Higgs to have it make sense.
So it's not the thing that is unifying it, but the fact is that the standard model really
only makes sense with the Higgs in it.
Mathematically, even phenomenologically in terms of these particles having mass.
Without the Higgs, all the particles would be massless.
We know that in fact it was actually the problem of the mass, of having the mass of the W boson,
which is the mediator of the weak force, that really drove the necessity of a Higgs.
And getting that mass was the big step that actually Stephen Weinberg made.
So all the attention goes to Peter Higgs, who mathematically came up with this idea.
But it was actually other people like Weinberg who realized it could be incorporated into
this structure, the standard model that we have, and it could give the W boson mass.
But allow the W boson initially to be seen as sort of a symmetric partner to other bosons
in the electromagnetic force.
Does that make sense?
I might actually add that you might be at the town of director, so Elle was quite about
the science.
And part of the story of this film is about the team in a certain unusual level of backgrounds
that he brought to him.
I studied knowledge of particle physics 30 years ago.
And amazingly this was the issues that were still actually being worked on now.
What's the state of particle physicists now?
Are they excited, depressed, baffled?
Where's the field going with this?
Yes.
I would say all of the above.
I mean, you know what's interesting?
There is a really, I think here again we're now seeing a really big distinction between
the theorists and the experimentalists.
The environmentalists are excited for the most part.
They're busy getting ready to start up again.
This is almost history for them now.
And they've been doing upgrades.
They have started it up.
Mike Weman, who is our character at the LHC, the Brit.
I mean, he's really at the center now of getting the machine ready to go.
And you see him in the news all the time.
He's telling what I say.
And they're about to go.
Meanwhile, they totally ripped out a lot of atlas and they've been replacing that.
So they're very excited about what they're going to find.
The theorists are worried, honestly, because in some sense nothing has changed.
I mean, there's this great accomplishment that completed the standard model.
I mean, having the Higgs, which is great for the people that predicted the standard model.
For the people that are mostly featured in our film, they're still really waiting to
see what's going to be there.
So I think there's nervousness.
How important is the difference between the CMS member and the atlas number?
It's not really considered significantly different, actually.
So it's considered that they've confirmed it, you know, together.
Could you elaborate a little more, if you could, about why the relatively high value
that was confirmed for the Higgs mass would preclude supersymmetry or the supersymmetric
particles?
It doesn't entirely preclude them.
You know, to a certain extent, we dramatized it a little more than it is in terms of being
a complete bifurcation.
And you know, it's like, you know, you get the impression, we don't say this, but I know
that we sort of give the impression that, you know, it has to be this or this.
It's really a continuum.
And there are similarly theories that, in a sense, are a continuum.
And there are theories that can accommodate a multiverse and supersymmetric particles.
What is true is that in order to be supersymmetric, though, it doesn't fall comfortably into
the simplest supersymmetric models.
So you know, all these models, they have lots of different variations.
You can vary things.
You can, you know, stick in additional, you know, terms and things like that.
The, you know, most common supersymmetric models do require a lower mass.
But there are, as I say, mixed things.
David, Sava, and Nima have all worked on things, you know, called split supersymmetry, which
allow the possibility that some things might be only explainable with multiverse, but there
could be supersymmetric particles.
Well, then let me rephrase my question.
Why is the current theory of the multiverse and supersymmetry?
Why are they mutually exclusive?
I'm not clear on that.
They're not.
So that's actually what I'm saying is that they are not exclusive.
There are theories that could accommodate them.
So you know, if you think in terms of the multiverse, you know, the big thing about the multiverse
saying that there are certain numbers in our theory that we will not be able to explain
because they are random in the multiverse, what could be is that there are multiverses
and some of those numbers are only explainable this way.
But some of the others are not going to need that, that they might be explainable by supersymmetric
partners.
What was, what is there about the Higgs?
What was there about the Higgs that made it as elusive as it was as opposed to the other
particles?
One of the things was the weight, the mass.
So you know, being able to have an accelerator that could generate energy or mass enough
to be able to see it.
I mean, so in a sense, that's the most obvious thing that was there.
Beyond that, it's also, it decays very quickly.
There's so many other things it can decay to.
They didn't know exactly where they were looking for it.
But principally they needed to get to the energy of the LHC to be able to see it.
I just want to comment that these questions are, they're pretty great in terms of the
science and one of the goals of the film more broadly was to make audiences, broad
audiences feel that they were insiders into the adventure, the pursuit.
And you know, it was the sense, the Higgs, the God Particle had to be found.
And yet the physicists had moved on to asking some of these questions.
And one of the real goals, problems, and I think the back and forth during the, during
the making of the film was how to do that.
And finally, the kind of comic, the 24-7 news cycle, you know, represents that other audience.
And you know, the goal was to kind of have all of you really feel on the inside as part
of it.
So.
Well, you succeeded brilliantly in that.
And I'd like to bring you in as director and producers to talk a little bit about what
did you find to be the greatest challenges in creating such a seamlessly exciting and
engaging film.
Well, one thing that wasn't a challenge was finding physicists who could explain what
they were working on to ordinary people.
It was the most incredible thing that there were so many scientists who could have been
on this screen because they loved explaining what they were doing.
It was absolutely amazing.
So I would say the big challenge, we have a lot of physicists on the cutting room floor
now because we just couldn't squeeze them in.
But that was not a challenge.
I think the biggest challenge was creating the dramatic arc that would keep everyone sitting
in their seats wanting to know the ending of a scientific question along with the people
in the film.
That is what filmmaking can do at its best, but that is very, very hard to get to.
I would just add to that, what Andrew said, the parallel or the counterpart of this, the
hardest part I think really in the end was how do we incorporate the science and not
lose the audience.
And that we knew we had this great dramatic story, we had great characters and a profusion
of characters that was not the issue as Andrew said.
The problem was how do we explain the things that people need to know to understand why
they should be excited and where do we do it.
And the way we did it was basically we initially constructed the film without the science.
And then we put it in at the end as needed.
And so the mantra was just enough just in time.
And I think another critical element of that was we essentially came up with a lexicon
for this film.
And at a certain point we just said, these are the terms we are going to explain and
these are ones we're not.
And in the end we required a lot of rigorousness to just decide.
And even one example being the multiverse, multiverse physicists use many terms for that
anthropics, multiverse, naturalness, environmental.
And we decided it's going to be the multiverse in this film.
And I literally went back and had people rerecord lines if they didn't use that word.
I just want to add that it was part of that challenge was, I don't think there was any
one way that we did that.
I think what Mark just said is it was critical and deciding what concepts to explain, when
to put them in, the kinds of graphics and so forth.
But it was also other aspects of audience engagement that I think are particularly relevant for
this audience.
What does a character, what qualities of character are needed to foster engagement,
identification, engagement of curiosity and the feeling that one really thinks that what
feels that one is kind of understanding it enough to feel engaged and on the edge of
your seat.
And part of it is certainly the kinds of characters that they were, not only were they really
great science explicators, as Andrea says, but very, very authentically who they are
and very much I think just it sounds like a cliche, but it's really true, really human.
You know, really engaged in a huge pursuit and passionate about it, also having human-scale
ambitions, also being funny and also, you know, so that was really important.
And another was, as we all began through David and through Mark to understand and the two
of us non-scientists, some of the larger stakes, the emotional implications of those
stakes, the sense that this could, even though the helium leak that caused this huge hiatus,
was a technical, you know, a mistake in the infrastructure, but it did reflect a larger
concern that we had come to understand in the field the sense of what if nothing is
found or what if the Higgs is found and nothing else and a sense that this could be the end
of a branch of science and what, because they were so passionate, you know, what that means
for an individual scientist, not only in terms of one's own life's work and legacy, but in
terms of, in fact, they're all in it for a larger reason and that this could be a smack
dead end, which of course was a very compelling imaginative concept as well.
Hi, yeah, along those lines, one of the devices I really enjoyed was the confessional that
you had.
So I wanted to hear more about the part where people started to record themselves on webcam,
right, and you had them.
I wanted to hear more about that process, how did you focus on the one, I forget the
experimental girl who really you showed a lot of hers, and was there a difference between
her as an experimental physicist versus a theoretical physicist?
I thought it was really cool and wanted to hear more.
We actually stole that idea because a lot of art is imitation except better.
We stole the idea from a film called Baghdad High in which kids in Baghdad were given
cameras to record themselves because Westerners couldn't really go there to record what they
wanted to record.
And it seemed like a way, in the beginning it was very tough because we didn't know if
anyone would speak honestly on camera.
And they're all kind of, well, should she wear makeup and she doesn't look very good,
and is she going to later say, this is Monica, I don't want to see myself looking like that.
It is just amazing that the scientists really got into recording themselves at critical
moments.
I mean, we have some moments on camera where you really see people depressed and scared
and David recorded himself many, many times including during his tenure decision process
and all kinds of, we actually have a wedding that isn't, that on the cutting room floor.
I mean, so the scientists were really into it.
Two weddings.
Two weddings.
So, I mean, we were invasive in ways that we wanted to be invasive and we were lucky
that the scientists themselves took on so much of that burden because that's often why
documentaries are not personal as people just don't let you in.
And we had scientists who were willing to let us in.
It was amazing.
I would say just in terms of differences between theorists and experimentalists, yes, experimentalists
did it and the theorists thought about it.
Did I keep a problem on camera when they were talking?
Absolutely, Monica.
You know, she just did it, you know, theorists, I mean, it took a lot of work to get them
to do anything.
Usually, with SAVAS, I'd have to have his student to actually set up the camera.
I thought what you did so incredibly well is the background of the images and the implication
that human imagination has been working on this from the beginning.
The mandala shapes that you used and there's all these alchemical images of the world that
are so much like the images that you used.
But the question is, it wasn't God particle a term that was used in a derogatory way by
someone who was mocking the Higgs boson.
I mean, it wasn't the physicists who were looking for it.
It was somebody who was commenting on it.
It was a physicist, actually.
A wonderful story is that, beyond Letterman, who is an experimentalist, he wrote a book
and he had proposed the title, The God Particle.
He actually wanted to call it The God Damn Particle.
The publishers said that that was not acceptable.
Physicists don't like the term, as we've said, because of the associations.
We tried to give that impression as well from a filmmaking perspective and publicists side.
It's great.
Were there any regrets expressed by Texas or otherwise for not moving forth with this?
I mean, this obviously seems to me the internet was associated with the creation and there
was certainly a lot of economic activity that had been lost to Texas, for instance.
We actually shot quite a bit more in Laxahatchee.
We had actually, it's also on the cutting room floor, we had a lot of things down there.
I went down there with David and actually filmed him seeing it for the first time.
The images you see are real, actually.
It's very sad.
When I was doing the location scouting, I was just driving around and right near where
the collider was, there was this tiny little town.
It's just the quintessential little one street dusty town.
We went in the cafe, I went in the cafe before we started shooting for lunch.
I started talking to the owner and I said what I was doing and he walks over and on this
top shelf, he pulls down this baseball cap and dusts it off and it says, Waxahatchee future
home of the SSC.
And there was a real poignancy to it.
They thought this was going to be it.
This would have been the center of the world, basically.
People had moved down there.
I know physicists who moved down to Waxahatchee who had been living there and they had quit
their other jobs or they had gone down there.
They had moved, they had set up their families there.
When it was canceled, it was a huge blow.
A number of them left physics.
It was actually one of the first emphasis to go to Wall Street.
I know a couple in particular that did at that point.
So it was a huge blow.
We showed the film, it's shown in Texas, I was at the USA Film Festival down there in
Dallas.
And we're kicking themselves.
One thing that's very interesting is that the country that's building the collider that's
going to be three times as big as this one is probably China.
The idea that you have these experiments and that attracts the best minds from all over
the world to work in your country is something that, we would like to see that come back
to America.
That was a little underlying theme in our goals in terms of making this film.
That it could be a real national, the idea that we would get a country sort of craving
for more science education was certainly something we thought about.
I don't know about that.
I know that there's talk of different ways of doing it.
The fundamental question is, do you make a linear collider, just slam things into each
other or into a target or do you have the circular one?
And the technology is, it's all about, the biggest challenge technologically is keeping
these things going in a circle.
Things want to go in straight lines and it takes more and more energy to keep them going.
It's a balance in terms of the larger you are, the larger the radius of curvature, the
less energy you need.
On the other hand, it's bigger and it takes a lot more space.
They always have a trade-off between those two elements.
In terms of the Watsuhatchee footage, it was something of a debate within our team.
Clearly that decision was, in terms of science education advocacy, the film could have emphasized
that a lot more.
It's certainly as a nation we are very aware of the topical relevance of that.
I think the way that it ended up being there was just the right one in terms of the vision
of the film makers.
Of course, one of the hopes is that excitement about scientific discovery and the education
that is needed, the resources that are needed to accomplish that at every level is really
important.
It was not the vision of the film makers to be advocacy film per se and that this could
be a jumping off point and we certainly are hopeful and laying some of the groundwork
for that.
That is one of those decisions and it was interesting that important.
I went two weeks ago to the Brookhaven National Labs to the NSLS-2, the inauguration of the
10,000 times brighter light that Brookhaven has now, which costs $912 million of taxpayer
dollars and is free available to various countries and so forth.
I read the comments to the article that I wrote subsequently and many of the people
who commented were furious that it wasn't built by a private industry rather than by
government money.
I found that crazy because I think these kinds of things can't really be done comfortably
by private industry.
The same is certainly not really comfortably done by individual businesses in a coalition.
I was wondering if that was exceptional.
That the comments that I got that this was unholy or somehow improper was typical of
what kind of reaction people might have had, not this audience obviously, to the film and
the money that was spent for the film and showing what you showed.
We haven't had that reaction.
I think it's interesting, one of the things about this is, and about the SSC, is I think
that this also is a good example or it really points to the future that experiments of this
order are not going to be able to be done for the most part by a single country.
A lot of people would say that one of the problems with the SSC was that it was so US
controlled and so US centric and there were other people in the physics community that
objected.
And within the US, there's a lot of debate about whether the physicists themselves jeopardized
it because of all their debates about where it should be.
In Chicago or from the lab they wanted it there.
There was a big push to have it in California out at Stanford.
And there was Texas.
Why did Texas win?
The physics community come together and support it and in the way it should have.
There's a lot of debate about that.
And it was very much run by the US.
And I think there are a lot of people that feel that in the end it had to be an international
collaboration and anything in the future is going to be because they are so expensive.
It's going to require that.
And I actually think that's a great thing.
I think it should not be a nationalistic thing.
And I think that in some sense is the point of the film is that it shows that that's why
CERN was created.
CERN was created in the 50s in the aftermath of the war expressly for the peaceful pursuit
of science, no military research and all these countries who had been formerly, very formerly,
very recently formerly fighting in some cases are united.
And so I think it's very appropriately a government funded international collaboration.
Regarding the SSC, some of us have heard that the reason it was canceled is that President
Clinton at the time made an offer to the governor of Texas and Richards that they could either
expand NASA, the space program, or continue with the SSC and Governor Richards decided
that NASA is more appealing to public sentiment.
They could put on a bigger splash with NASA, which is more easily understood than particle
physics.
Did you, in your research, did you find out, is this a true story or is this just rumored
that it was a political decision that was made?
And in fact, Stephen Weinberg, who's at the University of Texas, said that he kicked himself
for not getting more involved in fighting for the SSC.
I've heard this.
I did not find out anything more about it.
I mean, you know, Clinton's role in it has been debated.
In the end, he did come out for it, but he did not express the strongest support.
People do criticize him for not having expressed the strongest support initially, whether he
had some deal with Anne Richards.
I don't know that.
It was certainly political.
I think that most physicists now blame themselves that at a fundamental level, they did not
communicate to the public why this was important, as opposed to something like the space station
or something like that.
But I do feel like we've seen a reflection of that.
Even at CERN, they are incredibly supportive of all sorts of outreach and media and things
like this.
So, you know, and that's something that was motivating all of us as well.
Other question?
I'd like to actually ask a naive question on my part, perhaps.
Is there a possibility that with higher energy colliders that other candidates for the Higgs
could be discovered?
In other words, this thing is sitting right in the middle.
Is it possible that if a particle at 115 or at 140, MEV turns up that this would challenge
the conclusion that this particle is the horizon?
It wouldn't erase this one.
So, you know, as the Higgs, you know, I think there are theories that have other more than
one Higgs and even in supersymmetry.
So there could be other particles.
You know what physicists really, you know, they hedge their bets a little.
They say it's a Higgs-like particle.
And what that means and is true and that we know is why it's unique is it has certain
internal properties that a Higgs has.
Particularly, it's a scalar, what's called a scalar vector boson.
And that has to do with internal spin symmetry and other internal characteristics, which we
had never seen before.
So we know this is a particle that has properties we have never seen before and are consistent
with the Higgs.
Could there be others?
Yes, there could.
I don't think anybody thinks there'll be at lower masses.
I think that, you know, they really feel they've sort of explored that, but could it be at
higher?
Yeah.
I mean, they would love to find something and they would love to find something that doesn't
fit.
I mean, that would be the greatest discovery of all.
This is also a totally naive question, but what does it mean to see the Higgs boson?
Because we don't see them seeing.
That's a very good question.
That's not a naive question.
Yes, you actually never really do see the Higgs.
I mean, as with most of these things, the Higgs itself lasts so short amount of time,
but immediately decays into certain things.
And so, I mean, if you take a very simple macroscopic thing, you know, neutrons are
not infinitely stable.
They actually decay into a proton, electron, and a tree.
And the theory tells you what could be the different processes that a Higgs could decay
into.
There's different pathways.
There's different channels, they call them.
It could decay into a certain number of photons.
It could decay into a certain number of electrons or other types of leptons.
And so, what you're really looking for are the signatures of a process that could be
the Higgs that don't match anything else.
But that's a really incredibly difficult thing to see because there's trillions of collisions
happening and all these other things are decaying as well.
And so, this is what, essentially, this is what experimentalists do in analysis is.
They try to look at all the different pathways and correlate the ones that, you know, would
match because they match the energy of what was coming in and they matched these other
internal properties.
Okay, no, these are all things that we know, but these two things coming out here, they
don't really match with anything else, but they're consistent with what our theory says
the Higgs could decay in this way to be.
That's what they're looking for.
Okay, so you've kind of touched upon this a little bit, but I was wondering if you could
go a little bit more in depth in the feedback and the reception you've been receiving with
the film, has there been any more discussions being sparked in the physics community about
outreach or science advocacy in education?
I'm curious in that aspect.
The physics community has totally embraced it, which is absolutely really, really satisfying.
I mean, you know, obviously David, of course, in some sense, had the biggest stake of all
because he still has to face all of his colleagues and, you know, they really, you know, I think
trusted us in a sense to tell the story, but we were worried, for sure, you know, would
they really be comfortable with it?
And they have totally embraced it.
I mean, for them, it's become their anthem in some sense.
In fact, it's CERN now.
They've told us CERN has a little souvenir store outside of their thing, and they want
to make particle fever like they're definitive DVD at CERN.
And in a deeper way, the symbol of the standard model, the circular image with the Higgs
at the center, this didn't exist in the physics community.
Walter Murch came up with us, our editor.
And you know, their representations were like these odd charts and the Higgs was sticking
off here.
They did not really get the parallels in the symmetry.
And Walter became obsessed with something that was symmetric and that placed the Higgs
right in the center, which is where it should be for our film, but also for this standard
model.
And it has been completely embraced by the physics community.
And they now want to make it like their symbol.
And so NEMA was wearing a t-shirt with it at some physics conference, and everybody went
wild, and they were blogging about it, and they want to put it on their mugs and things
like that.
But that's pretty much being embraced by the physics community, I'd say.
You can all lie down two lines.
On the website, that's right.
But I just wanted to add to that.
Certainly the film has gotten great reviews.
And if you look at Metacritic, if you've timed, Zellite times and all of that, I mean, I think
that it really did succeed at what was the goal to cross over from being a science doc
to being a doc that was really received broadly.
That said, it wasn't easy.
And the process of the making of it, the decision making in terms of getting it out there, we
have had our lumps and bumps.
I mean, in many ways, it sort of paralleled the topic of the film itself in terms of successes
and failures.
But it's certainly the fact of the nature of it probably limited to some degree how many
people in the academy saw it, for instance, in that kind of thing.
But it certainly has had and continues to have.
We're very proud that it is, I think, the second highest grossing doc of 2014.
And it was really distributed in a not in a traditional way because we couldn't get the
attention of agents.
So that's, and we certainly are intending, the educational distribution is beginning,
and we certainly are intending to make the distribution and also the outreach impact,
which can go in many, many directions as strong as it possibly can be.
The film has a science curriculum that was created for it so that teachers can use it
in the classroom.
And right from the beginning, we thought about how the film would have an impact, specifically
would have an impact on the teaching of science because we thought the story was so inspirational
to young people because young people could perhaps picture themselves if they weren't
there.
I think I always thought science was just being a theorist and you had to be Einstein
or physics was.
And when you see Monica talking about her heart, her heart, and her boots and how she's
doing wiring, putting little wires together, I think that certainly for me broadened my
sense of, and also that it was so collaborative, which was something I never really thought
about.
So we thought the film would be very inspirational to young people.
And David was involved in something called QuarkNet, which actually trains high school
teachers to get their kids to analyze actual data sheets.
And there are, I don't remember, 4,000 how many QuarkNet teachers were there?
There were a lot.
And so we already were thinking right from the beginning, could high school students
see this, could college students see it, could it play in science type societies like the
Society of Mechanical Engineering or whatever, these are all over the country.
And we gave a presentation at a major conference for science museums and technology centers.
And that was right even before, I mean we barely had a trailer at that point, but we
really care about the film getting out there.
So if any of you have or attached to organizations that might want to show this for any reason,
yes, we really care about that kind of alternative distribution.
I'm a totally person and my mind is just going all over the place.
And I have a twofold question that I could ask sit here and ask you like 100 questions.
But when did you come up with the idea of doing this film, how long did it take you
to do this film?
And the other question is when they actually had the collisions, you know, at the first
time around when the helium leaked, there was this areas that they didn't consider,
right, of the consequences of other things that had to do that were part of the environment
that would create the collision, would allow the collision to happen.
But when the actual collisions did in fact take place, what were the consequences?
I mean the explosions that they just contained, was there a fear that there could be like
a really big like accident or, yeah, it's like what was the, you know, because the media
plays it up, it's like the black hole and we're going to disappear.
But was there actually a fear of, oh God, did we not consider something and this could
go really, really wrong and how, I mean, what were the implications of that?
Okay, I'll start, I think at the beginning, which is the beginning, how the film started.
The film started in the mind of David Kaplan.
A theorist who had a theory that a film about this thing turning on could be dramatic and
exciting and interesting.
And you know, David says, you know, probably as early as 2006, he was, you know, always
telling his family and friends as things going to turn on and it's going to be amazing,
amazing, amazing.
And somebody said, you know, okay, stop talking about it, you know, you should do something
and you know, he thought about writing, but that wasn't really right.
And then he thought about trying to film something and he actually, I think, did try
to film something and he famously filmed something with a Shelley Clash Owl, a famous
physicist and had no sound.
And I heard about him.
I was in the narrative fiction world and was actually trying to get a script made.
And you know, I was always interested in somehow doing something in film that related to science.
I thought it was going to come from the fictional world.
I thought I would write something about science.
And I heard about this guy trying to make a documentary about this and the people who
told me about it said, okay, he has no film experience.
It's an experiment.
They don't know if it's going to work.
They don't know if they'll find anything.
We're not going to get involved.
And I said, that sounds great.
And I met David in 2007.
So I heard about it.
He was in CERN.
I tracked him down.
And we talked about it.
For me, I was very clear from the beginning.
I did not want to make a typical science documentary.
I wanted to use the narrative skills that I had in filmmaking, make a character based,
try to make a dramatic film.
And that's what David wanted as well.
So I started really working on it full time in 2008.
We started trying to get together.
Andrew and Carla came on.
We started to try to get some money together.
The first shoot was in 2008 in September for first beam.
We finished literally running to the airport with the film in 2013, in June of 2013.
In terms of the explosion, yes, there was a lot of sensationalists talk about could
it create a mini black hole that would destroy the universe?
No physicist was ever worried about this.
The person who was the biggest promoter of this was a high school science teacher in
Hawaii who had read part of a paper that said that it could create little black holes but
did not read the rest of the paper, which said that if it created these black holes,
they would evaporate.
Nonetheless, it got so much attention that CERN felt they had to address it.
And they actually had two very respected theorists go through all the calculations to show that
it was not going to be an issue.
In terms of the accident, when the accident happened, they were not doing collisions.
They were still first beams.
They were just getting beams in one direction and the other.
And in fact, the accident happened when they were just testing raising the energy of one
of the beams.
And they were trying to raise the energy and they needed to increase the energy and the
magnets to be able to keep them in line.
And what they believe now is that there was just as they increased the current in these
magnets, one of the welds broke and it sparked and it caught the helium which is used to
cool it.
You know, it ignited that and it exploded.
There were it had nothing to do with collisions, particles or anything like that at all.
It was a very simple bed weld that did that.
The collisions themselves take place in the center of the detectors and there's no worry
that they're going to, they want them to explode in a sense.
You know, that's the whole point.
There's no concern.
And from the physics community, there was never any concern that they were going to
do anything that could create a problem.
I also just added in terms of some of the happy accidents or making your lock or jumping
from failure to failure which I think, you know, all of them are different ways of saying
it's only a letter to expressions, you know, that if you're in it for the long run and
you believe in it, that you just keep going and good things happen in some way, I think
that there are great backstories that, you know, partly speak to what documentaries
are making like this is about and to this particular subject and the people who do it.
One of them is that we really, we started to raise money for it just as the financial
world was melting down.
And it turned out that we reached out in different ways and it was actually people in the finance
world who were trained physicists or mathematicians and who still had some love of it and we
sent out a bunch of cold letters and, you know, one or two people actually opened them, you
know, and remembered back to, you know, and got excited and that started a ball rolling
that really enabled us to do the initial shooting.
And once we got a certain ball rolling, it was easier to raise money both in terms of
investment and in terms of philanthropic and foundation dollars.
Another, this film could have gone in so many directions and that period during the hiatus
when the machine had had the accident and was being repaired, which was over 18 months,
there was a great, there was certainly some depression and some sense of what does this
mean and we're ever going to get it up again and all those issues.
But there's also a great deal of natural abolions and curiosity and kind of a, you know, sort
of energizer bunny, you know, we would like, you know, David would say, David and Mark,
you know, there's something we really should film.
This may be a way to get it at a new way to analyze the data.
It's going on at NYU where there's a dark matter experiment.
The results of the American are going to be described at a conference in Santa Barbara
and we have some great footage which eventually is going to be put to use but really does reflect
a very natural buoyancy on the part of the scientists, the theorists.
Then there's the elephant in the room in which we have spoken about Mark did but which is
that at a certain point we really could, the science was becoming too difficult for the
first editor to really address in a way that the film we were kind of stalled and through,
well, really through Mark's long-term friendship with the brilliant feature editor Walter
March, he came in and really started to cut the film in a very different way in a more
kind of action film way and then we had, we never anticipated, we'd have the million
dollar ending within the course of our shooting and so there is all of those things together
with the characters and the sense of the story and the way we shot I think all combined
to have made it something that is of such broad interest to non-science audiences.
Do you have any of the cutting room for stuff? On DVD do you have any of the outtakes?
Well, we actually don't really have a DVD yet but in principle it will, yes, I mean it
is online so there's, I mean I, it's difficult to estimate exactly how much footage I have
but I mean it's in the neighborhood of 300, 400 hours of material and you know it's 99
minutes so there is a lot that's out of it. Some very complete fairly well edited sequences,
one of them has definitely been cut and is available online, I mean actually on our website
right now you can order sort of an enhanced download that includes that and a couple of
other things and we're hoping that there will be some additional things as well. Some of
them really were fairly, you know, pretty progressed fairly far in terms of the cutting
and we do hope that we'll be able to use them. Particlefever.com, www.particlefever.com.
Could you say more about how you convinced Sharon to let you in? I mean why did they
allow you to come in to do this whole project? You know it's interesting, it was not that
difficult, people have asked me that and I actually know some people that said that they
had difficulty. In general they're pretty open, I think we had a special access partly
because of our physics backgrounds, that they were very open in that regard and the interesting
thing was people would typically come over and their news crews that would come over
and they shoot for a day or two and they shoot certain people and they disappear. The fact
that I kept going back became the key and that I made certain key alliances right from
the very first time I was there and so typically when you go to CERN, if you go as a media
for media purposes, they assign you a sort of coordinator who's there and after the first
time I was there they stopped coming with me because they basically knew who I was going
to see. I was seeing very responsible people and at that point all I had to do was say
I'm coming at this point and they'd say okay we'll leave you a pass and then I just would
go wherever I wanted. And so again I think it was a function of the fact that I had key
people involved that they knew were responsible and then I kept coming back again and again
and again and in fact I came back so much that at a certain point I think people thought
I worked there actually. They didn't realize that I didn't actually live there all the
time but I was really so integrated that nobody even paid any attention when I was there and
that really ended up being what counted. And for our physicists I think that also when
talk to them why they opened up to us so much was they also saw the persistence there. They
knew that I was going to be back again and so if they didn't say it then I'm going to
get them to say it another time so they might as well just do it and they ended up really
being an incredible ally to the whole thing. Not only the physicists but CERN itself has
an extensive media department and they do all these official things they film everything
and they got very excited by the fact that I was making a feature film. I mean I actually
don't know which was more important whether I had a physics background or whether I had
worked on the talented Mr. Ripley which they all seemed to love. And the fact that they
had this film part to me was something they hadn't really dealt with before and so they
were very open to that and they would collaborate. And so the media department they loved the
idea that somebody was making a real feature film and they became in a sense a second and
third unit for me. We ourselves were usually just very small crew but I could have them
cover other things for me and they all put it together.
There's a bigger question involved I think which is that we always pitch the film as
what if there have been cameras inside Los Alamos. And I think we all wanted to know
as filmmakers but we thought that the public would want to hear what were the inside discussions
were there moral questions the question of how many scientists believe in God or do they
not believe in God or what do they believe in and what do they think they're doing what
is the beauty in it for them. That was something that I think we were very aware of going in
and I think that the scientists both in the university settings and its CERN itself also
they wanted mark there. They wanted people to hear them talking about some of those bigger
questions that they know they share with everybody else.
Do you have an upcoming project or a future project that you're working on or you're
primarily working on marketing and distributing this film?
I actually am working on another project and it's fiction but it's actually interesting
because as Andrew says we talked about it being Los Alamos for me people have said what do
you want to do. If somebody said if I had all the money in the world what would I do as
my next documentary and I said well it's not about our money I'd like to go back into
time and I'd like to go back to when Watson and Crick discovered DNA and I think that's
another place where it would have been great to have cameras and it turns out that there's
a book that I'm really interested in called the Goldbug Variations if anybody's heard
about it by Richard Powers. It is about molecular biology and music and so this art science
overlap is very dear to me and it turns out that the rights became available and so that's
going to be my next project I hope.
Carla and I have four documentaries that will come out this year including there's one on
Tuesday night at the at Lincoln Center it's called the Zionist idea and this shows our
crazy curiosity goes in so many directions. It's a look at the evolving definition of
Jewish statehood from the 19th century through to the present. We're also doing a film on
mental health services in the military called Thank You for Your Service which unusually
takes the in part takes the point of view of the psychiatrists and psychiatrists and
psychologists who actually work within the military and they went up to the highest levels
including a female general who was head of all mental health services there. We have
a film about a historic film about Gertrude Bell that will probably come out in the fall
who is an explorer British explorer and diplomat who drew the original borders of Iraq and
we're also working on a film about wind power offshore wind power and the struggle to make
it happen in the state of New Jersey. A real advocacy film for a change.
Please join me in thanking Andrew, Carla and Mark not only for their generous time today
but for creating a really brilliantly inspiring film that I think from our perspective of
the helix center is sort of the quintessence of fusing art and science.
