Now I'd like to introduce today's participants.
And as I say your name, if you could just raise your hand
so the audience can identify you.
Sarah Dammers, the Horace D. Taft Associate Professor
of Physics at Yale University, is a particle physicist
who studies the fundamental particles and forces of nature.
Her recent work has focused on the characterization
of the Higgs boson and the measurement
of tau polarization with the Atlas collaboration,
as many of you saw in the film.
It turns large Hadron Collider.
She received her bachelor's degree from Harvard University
and her PhD from the University of Rochester.
She was a postdoctoral researcher
with Stanford's SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
before joining Yale's faculty in 2009.
While at Yale she has received an early career award grant
from the Department of Energy
and the Yale Provost Teaching Award.
She also collaborates with professional dancer, writer,
and director of the Yale Dance Studies curriculum, Emily Coates.
She encodes, co-teach, a physics of dance class together
at Yale and are writing a course book under contract
with Yale University Press.
They've created an art science film called The Three Views
of the Higgs and Dance.
Mark Levinson, before embarking on his film career,
earned a doctoral degree in theoretical particle physics
from the University of California at Berkeley.
In the film world he became a specialist in ADR, working
with actors and directors in post production
to write and record additional dialogue.
He has worked closely with such directors as Anthony Mengella,
an English patient, talented Mr. Ripley, Cold Mountain,
Francis Ford Coppola, the Rainmaker, Milosz Foreman,
Goya's Ghost, Sean Penn, The Pledge, and David Fincher,
on Seven and the Social Network.
He is the writer, producer, director of the narrative
feature film Prisoner of Time, which examined the lives
of former Russian dissident artists
after the collapse of the Soviet Union, and had an acclaimed
premier at the Moscow International Film Festival.
And as many of you saw, he directed the award winning
documentary feature Particle Fever.
Alberto Mengella is Canadian writer, translator, editor,
and critic born in Buenos Aires in 1948.
He has published several novels, including News
from a Foreign Country Came and All Men are Liars,
and nonfiction, including A History of Reading,
The Library at Night, and together with Gianni Guadalupe,
the Dictionary of Imaginary Places.
He has received numerous international awards,
among others the commander of the Order of Arts
and Letters from France, and is Dr. Honors Kazza of the Universities
of Leige in Belgium, and Angler Ruskin Cambridge
in the United Kingdom.
His new book Curiosity, as I mentioned earlier,
will be published in March.
Gene Strauss is the author of Morgan, American Financier,
which was published in 1999, and again republished in 2014,
and Alice James, a biography first published in 1980,
and again in 2011, which won the Bankrupt Prize
in American History and Diplomacy.
Her essays and reviews have appeared in publications,
including The New Yorker, The New York Review of Books,
The New York Times, Vogue, and Slate,
a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences
and the American Philosophical Society.
She has received fellowships from the MacArthur
and Guggenheim Foundations, served
as president of the Society of American Historians,
and worked as a consultant, as oral historian,
to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
She is currently director of the Dorothy and Lewis B.
Coleman Center for Scholars and Writers
at the New York Public Library.
Now we'll begin.
Maybe that film was absolutely fantastic,
and there's a moment when they've done it, at least,
we think they've done it.
They've found the Higgs boson.
And Savas, if anybody hasn't seen it,
maybe you can explain more exactly what it is.
But he says this little speech that made me cry,
probably you as well from watching it,
about how astonishing it is.
That humanity, that people with our little brains
can figure out things like this,
that we want to understand the world
and the universe we live in, and we can.
At least so you probably remember that scene better
than I've just described it.
You know, Savas was such a gift to us.
I mean, it's just like everything he said
was like a Greek philosopher.
I mean, and yeah, that line, I mean, you know,
really in some sense it also reflects
what really attracted me to physics initially.
I mean, this fact that there seems to be,
first of all, that there's any laws of nature at all.
I mean, there's any laws of nature at all,
that they're describable by mathematics.
Mathematics is a language that we've invented
and we understand this is the biggest mystery of all.
I mean, that there didn't have to be order
that we could comprehend.
And the fact that we come up with this,
you know, humans have come up with this invention,
this mathematical thing that actually describes
physical nature and the LHC, an extreme example
of very abstract theories and then this huge machine
that Sarah works on comes up with a bump
that corresponds to it.
I think it really is the thing that is the most magnificent
thing and representative of an absolute peak
in human achievement.
I found it fascinating.
The scientist is trying to find a vocabulary
to speak about this and the vocabulary coming
from philosophy, from literature.
I found it very moving that scientists speak
of a beautiful formula, a beautiful discovery.
What does that mean to a scientist?
I think that from my perspective,
the scientists are human beings
and so we think in these terms, right?
It's interesting that there's been a divide
between what people think of as the scientific brain
that's operating and the artistic brain that's operating.
I mean, I think it's natural to use that kind of language
to describe something that you're excited about.
It's wonderful to see it, to see it spoken,
to hear it spoken.
I think that the excitement or the miraculous discovery
of the Higgs, it's the amazing fact
that we can make that kind of progress
is just firmly planted in the context of the lack
of understanding in general that we have, right?
That keeps that discovery at perspective.
So as a practicing scientist,
thinking about the Higgs and that achievement,
as thrilling as it is and as much of a peak as it is,
it's in this incredible valley with the 97%,
94% of the universe that we don't understand,
these huge mysteries, right?
So it is very exciting and fascinating for me
to think about that progress,
but it's in that context of just a tremendous amount
that we don't understand.
It's not clear if we have a framework
that will let us make further progress in the same way.
For the next step.
Yeah, and it's true.
And I think that was one of the things that gave us
some confidence that hopefully there would be people
interested because we could touch these big issues.
And these are issues that anybody can understand
and anybody can appreciate.
You know, the details,
and look, we made the decision very early on,
this is not gonna be the film that explains
all the detailed physics,
but in some sense, we're gonna go for the big things.
And the big issues,
which are things that anybody has,
you know, that we hoped anybody of any intellectual curiosity
would be interested in, curiosity.
I mean, I think it's amazing,
you've written this book,
because I think that's another one of S
Grecise's great lines.
When he's saying, you know, why do we do this?
You know, and he thinks about these things
for no reason, for no reason.
I mean, and you know, he ties it in with this issue of,
you know, there's no evolutionary value,
and but what is the basis of it?
Is a curiosity, and once you have it, you can't forget it.
I mean, you must explore a lot more in your book.
Well, I try to look at the questions that we ask.
I think that the questions are so much more interesting
than any answers that we can give,
and what interested me in the film was that even
with the discovery of the Higgs particle,
you don't have an answer.
You simply have more questions.
You have another set of questions.
And I'm always interested in the fact that we come
from whatever vocabularies we have,
and we apply the vocabulary to the world that we're seeing,
because we have to remember that the universe
is totally uncaring, the universe is not conscious of its laws,
or what we do with them, or where we are.
So these are questions that we bring to our state of being
and to the universe around us.
Even these words are invented by us.
So we invent the story, and then we ask, how does this happen?
What is the initial impulse to understand something
or to work it out?
That's the deep question, in a sense.
And similarly related to the art issue,
what is it that prompted the first person to draw
a representation of the world on a cave?
I mean, animals don't do that.
I mean, that they would think that we could abstract,
it's an abstract symbolic representation of the world
around them.
Was it motivated for informational purposes?
Was it just, is it something intrinsic in us
that we just want to represent something?
And I do think that there's a very direct line
to what MIMA is doing on the board,
and we'll achieve very much.
There's a beautiful count.
Yeah.
I was going to say the same thing.
It's just a position of the glorious cave drawings,
and MIMA writing his formulas on the board.
And it made me think, this is what I see.
That the caveman was saying, this is what I see,
and MIMA is saying, this is what I see in such different realms
and eons.
But why do you think somebody first did it?
They're winning.
Biologists say that we came up with imagination
as a mechanism for survival, so that we
are the only species that can have an experience without actually
having the experience.
We can invent the story of what would happen
if you put your hand in the mouth of a lion before doing that.
And imagination leads immediately to questioning.
When you look at something and you think
that there's a story there, you want to know who did it.
You want to know where it's going.
You want to know what happened once upon a time
and how will it end.
I think we also, as individuals, have
experience with this without having to be
at the forefront of it, meaning when I was learning physics,
I got to discover Newton's laws.
Every step, when I understood something
and saw, wait, this is applying to something real around me.
I didn't have to be the first one to come up with that
to understand that experience.
And I think that all of the learning
that we do when we're young in science or not in science,
that teaches us what discovery is.
Every individual gets to discover so many things
about the world.
The nice thing about, well, in the scientific discovery,
what you get to keep doing is asking questions along that line,
along a path.
But you have a tremendous amount of experience
discovering all the physics that's
been discovered before you, everything you have time to
discover that you can manage to grasp, right?
I got the metaphor of running, by the way,
the fact that you can't concentrate on getting somewhere.
You need to keep asking the questions along the road.
And that's what makes the activity interesting.
Actually, it's also interesting.
I mean, we don't join in the film.
But Monica, Fabiola, and Martin all run.
And Fabiola, Martin, Monica, and Nemo all play the piano.
And I'm not going to extrapolate to everybody.
But it is interesting that they have the running
is this persistence, endurance, processing sort of thing.
And then they interest in music, this other slide.
It's going to be for each other.
So we take these words and say all activities.
For no reason.
Yeah.
Yes.
It makes me think a little bit about young children
and watching them explore the world with curiosity.
Every single moment is a discovery for a young child.
And certain adults keep that quality.
And want to keep.
Do you learn it?
We relearn it.
Wait a second.
I get to ask why?
I get to keep asking why?
And having my kids are four and six right now,
I remember the stage when they went through and realizing,
wow, we learned being able to do that because I forgot it.
I forgot that I had permission to ask how does that work?
And to keep asking that next question.
And not for what financial purpose.
I guess.
That was a great moment.
Great moment.
So I'm going to ask David.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So everybody here has seen the film.
Yeah.
Actually, with a curiosity thing, one of my favorite moments
actually, there was one Martin's doing the experiment
with the kids.
And he says, see this?
And he says, yeah, but the card got wet.
Yeah.
You know, that's not exactly focusing on exactly the same thing.
It's a good question.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That leads to something else.
Right.
But it's interesting.
You were saying, too, I mean, in some sense,
is it evolutionary adaptations?
Maybe initially, it was predictive,
that there was an adaptation that you could predict.
That we first got this capability saying,
if I go there and there's a lion there, I'm going to be eaten.
And maybe it was a very practical thing initially
to have this predictive imagination.
And maybe the next step was an imagination
that didn't necessarily have survival on it.
Or maybe there wasn't a difference,
because these are categories that we
keep establishing in terms of practicality.
You were saying this absurd difference
between the mind of a scientist and the mind of an artist.
Well, for a very long time, there was no difference
in the Renaissance and the Middle Ages.
An alchemist was what?
An artist or a scientist?
The an artist.
Leonardo Dante, who was quoted and who, in fact, fits
so perfectly with his idea at the end of his vision,
when finally he sees the great vision,
he compares it to the universe of scattered pages
that somehow come bound in a volume at last for him to see.
This is what I felt with the film,
that the volume was being bound at last.
We haven't read it.
We don't know what it means.
But somehow it's coming together.
It's such a beautiful model.
Well, I do think that this notion of the artist's brain
and the science brain being separate is something
that's just not true.
I mean, there are examples of extremities in both cases.
But I think one of the rewarding things
we're taking a film around has been having people come up
to me afterwards who are not physicists,
which are first of all other scientists,
but also in the arts and feeling akin to it.
And actually having scientists tell me
that they feel like they're artists.
They feel like they're very creative artists.
It is.
You know, it's practically, it's difficult.
And you fail and come up with lots of bad ideas,
but artists do that all the time as well.
Lovely idea that came up, the idea of failure as essential.
Stevenson had this wonderful line about our purpose in life.
It's not to succeed, but to continue
to fail in the best of spirits.
He would be very friendly with solace.
I think one of the differences that I've seen working
with artists and learning more about the products
and the definition of research within art is the process.
Right?
That's what's different for us.
We have a different process.
And it's something that you learn how to do.
You have to learn how to do.
And when I talk to other physicists,
we have a language that's shared.
We tend to approach problems in similar ways.
And what's interesting, I think, if you're working
in these different realms, pushing toward research,
discovering something, is to have access
to other kinds of processes.
It's interesting that the scientists also have a piece
of that artistic process, right?
We're allowed to try to learn different kinds of processes.
I think it's helpful when you have that in your toolbox,
not just one way of approaching a problem.
Do you see parallels?
No, go ahead.
When you're working on dance, do you see parallels?
I mean, it's a different language,
but do you think about the connections?
Right.
So I'm not actually the one working on dance.
I'm working with a dancer.
And so I think we try to have our two disciplines interacting
with each other.
So we're going after that, I think.
We're actively trying to see how is your process, what's mine?
And yeah, that's our goal in some ways
of that collaboration.
Absolutely.
I think this was sort of fascinating
when I saw that you were doing this,
because there's a troop, Liz Lerman, as a dancer.
She has a troop down in Baltimore.
And she went to CERN.
And she wanted to try to do something there.
And she just, you know, is just this feeling as an artist.
And I think we're seeing a lot of this.
There's a cross fertilization, but there seems
to be many more artists that are really getting
fascinated with science.
And so she went there.
And they went down to the cavern.
And they did this thing.
And, you know, she had these dancers,
these men wearing dresses.
And you see the, they filmed it.
And you see these engineers there with hard hats
just sort of looking.
And I don't know which is more bizarre, you know,
the construction, like the Atlas cavern,
or these men and dresses dancing around down there.
And she wanted to just do a piece about it.
And we actually filmed a performance that she did
and didn't make it in the film.
But it's so, it was fascinating when I read
that you are now also involved working with a dancer.
And what was, how did that happen?
What was the motivation for you?
Well, one thing I should say is that we've had Liz
come to our class.
So that those of us who work in these kinds of juxtapositions
tend to find each other.
So the collaboration between physics and dance
that we have at Yale was really started in a top down way.
It wasn't organic story.
It was a curriculum development piece.
And I was imagining physics, like taking dance
to a work of art and breaking it down
from the physics perspective, right?
Making that mathematical model of everything
that's happening in physics.
And the dancer who I happened to work with
was very sophisticated with a mission of her own
who was doing movement research and was not interested
in that kind of art at the service of science collaboration,
which became obvious very early.
And so the two of us decided, let's
take our two disciplines on equal footing
and see where this takes us.
Let's let dance, help us understand and communicate science.
And let's let science help us understand and communicate dance.
Let's go in both directions, take turns leading.
And then sometimes we're not going
to be speaking the same language.
And those times we'll just put the two next to each other
and see what happens.
I think the place that we've pushed it
is this idea of embodied cognition,
and not really pushed it in that direction,
but thinking about it.
From my perspective as a practicing scientist,
what is it that how does this feed back into my research?
And it's been a recognition of the reality,
that the ways we operate in the world,
including our very bodies, have an impact
on the way we're approaching the world.
These, the creativity that you have,
the kinds of questions that you can ask.
The questions you're capable of asking,
the analogies that you have access to,
are all limited or informed by your experience in the world,
which wow, you're right, that has something to do
with your body, it never occurred to me
before interacting with the dancer.
I was sentenced as well, because I'm always wondering,
when you talk about that model of the universe,
where we are in this tiny lost corner
and the possibility of these other worlds around us,
expanding, what don't we see?
And already there, I'm limiting the question
by the fact that I know that humans see.
But what are the senses that would allow us
to understand, grasp, perceive, discover?
I don't know what verb to use, the rest of the universe.
Yeah, well, I think you are up the boundaries of things
that we can comprehend.
And that is an interesting concept.
I mean, the idea of the multiverse,
I mean, in one sense, it's easy to say the words,
oh, it's other universes,
but actually rigorously, mathematically,
I mean, it's hard to actually imagine
how we would actually detect it.
I mean, I think that's really the issue.
People often ask, do I prefer the multiverse
or supersymmetry or what do physicists prefer?
And I always say, I think it's legitimate,
is they actually don't care as long as they know
which one it is.
I mean, because supersymmetry
has all these beautiful things about it.
I mean, it's really, it's such an absolute accomplishment
and it would solve certain issues, possibly,
possibly explaining dark matter and various other issues.
And so that would be great.
But, I mean, if we could prove that there's other universes,
I mean, that would be even more profound,
but the problem is we just don't know how to do it.
And so we've invented an idea
that we might not be able to prove,
which is a very difficult position to be in.
Because not only perhaps prove,
but also we wouldn't have the vocabulary to name it.
I love an anecdote about Christopher Columbus
coming to America and he writes this in his journal
that he approaches the coast of Venezuela
and he sees three manatees swimming
and he says, yesterday I saw three mermaids,
but they're not as beautiful as they say they are.
LAUGHTER
We bring the vocabulary of what we think we're going to see,
but if we see something that we have no way of recognizing
how do we name it?
I wanted to see what you think about this,
because I understand what you said about art and science
and so on, but are there, A, individual differences
in the level of passion and energy
that goes behind the kind of endeavor
that we saw in the movie,
and which I feel coming from you,
because when you talked about what you were doing,
there is so much energy already behind it
that I assume you have a lot of passion for what you do.
So not everybody has it.
So that's number one.
And number two, is it possible that certain researchers
or endeavors are more fueled by curiosity
and this desire for the quest than others?
And is it possible that physics is one of them?
Wow.
So I think back to the idea of process,
I think in any work that you're doing,
there's going to be incredible drudgery.
There's going to be times when you're measuring
the lengths of springs.
I recently have been cutting and pasting a lot of names
of atlas data set IDs that we used
for one of the Higgs characterization papers
into a spreadsheet.
So I think that there certainly are different levels
of tenacity that people have.
Something that I try to do that is much easier
as an educator and a researcher to do for me
is maintain the sense of the big picture
so that when I'm cutting and pasting or whatever
the drudgery is in my process or the things I have to get through,
I know I appreciate the little steps,
the completed spreadsheet that tells the complete picture
of how we simulated that sample and made that plot.
It's the little victories that I celebrate along the way,
but also try to maintain the big picture of what the science is
trying to achieve and what we're doing together.
So I think that some people, the people who I've seen
who have left the fields of physics,
I don't know that it's a different level of passion.
It's not even a different level of capability,
but it's important to have the ability
to make it through the drudgery of your practice.
And when I think of the parallel with the artist,
so Emily, the practice of dance, the rigor of that,
or basketball player, dribbling the basketball,
you've got to dribble the basketball,
you've got to do the layups over and over and over again
and keep in mind the big picture of the game
that you're going to play, right?
You've got to, and then keep fighting past
when you lose the game or when we make the plot
and things don't look the way we think that they do,
things that we don't understand them.
So yeah, I think to be successful.
I was looking for something.
It seems to me there is an element of searching
for something, finding answers to something
that is particular to certain fields.
Yeah, I think you're right.
I think you're right.
For me, the idea of being associated with a quest
that I see as such a fundamental part
of who human beings are, something that's been going on.
How many years, thousands and thousands and thousands
of years trying to understand the universe,
even being a little part of that for me is real privilege
and I think keeps me very excited.
I don't know.
I mean, it is true, especially in big science.
I mean, there are different levels of engagement
and there are people that are very happy
to be just doing their little job
and they're not really thinking about the big questions.
It may have been their initial motivation
but the practicality is different
and it's hard to be at the frontier of things
and I think that you tend to think
that somebody who's an artist might be demonstrating
the passion more but you have to compare it
to the people in the sciences that are doing the same thing.
I think one of the big differences in the science
is there's sort of a measurable sense of progress
that when you're doing your spreadsheet,
you know when you've completed it, you've got it
and it's done whereas I think in the arts,
it's actually, you're never really sure if you're done.
You're never really done.
I think you're never really done.
No, the whole idea of discovery with the Higgs boson
is it's a limit we set five sigma, right?
I mean, there's not that kind of certainty
in the sciences, I don't think.
I don't know when I'm done with my plot.
I believe that I understand the data.
I've convinced enough of my colleagues
so they'll let me move forward with it
and we'll put our names on it in a paper
but no, we never know when we're done.
No, no, no, I didn't mean in a big sense.
I certainly agree with that but along the way,
there are tasks that can be completed
that you can say, you know, whereas, you know,
writing, what about it, you know,
do you ever really think that you're right?
That you, you know, oh, I've got this chapter,
I'm done with it, I don't have to go back to it.
Never do it.
This also reminds me,
and you're commenting about Columbus,
Rangabel with Daniel Boorstein in his 1975 wreath lectures,
made a distinction between discoverers and explorers.
Columbus was a discoverer because he was looking
for what he thought he knew, you know,
something about Asia that he was looking for a path.
But Bournsney's distinction was about exploration,
not having a defined goal per se.
I mean, I'm also wondering how you think about that
in your individual work, is that a useful distinction?
Or how do you process your curiosity
in terms of discovery versus exploration?
Yeah, I mean, writing is similar and different
in some ways to all of this,
but to have an enormous research project,
which you probably think you know about at the beginning,
and then when you're tunneled into years and years
of reading and observing and learning,
you find it's taking you in directions
you weren't expecting at all.
Well, you have your wonderful biography of Alice James.
You mentioned somewhere that Alice James talks
about the everyday tasks,
and in what bigger picture does that fit?
I don't know that I'm quoting this correctly,
but to speak of what she does every day,
and then asking the question of that you were asking,
in what big book do these individual chapters fit?
That connects to something that Mark said earlier too
about making this film,
finding people through whom to tell the story.
I think biography is finding narrative ways
into history that are very appealing,
both as a writer to be able to understand history that way,
and one hopes as a reader.
So yes, there is a particular life
with its particular circumstances,
and you absolutely stay with those,
but you also have to give it a context.
So here is the younger sister of William and Henry James
who was very articulate, very bright,
but she wasn't a genius on the order of her brothers.
What could she carve out for herself as a life,
as a way to be, to speak?
She did actually keep a diary toward the end of her life
and found her own voice in a way,
and was a very difficult life,
and it was only the last few years of her life,
but she did make a place for herself in that pantheon,
but in there was published, nobody knew about it.
So in an odd way, this is a funny thing to say,
but I think you'll see what I mean.
In writing a book about her, I gave her a bigger voice.
Yes, absolutely.
Absolutely, and you followed that part of exploration
rather than discovery, because you didn't know
where you were going, and I think it's always
the most interesting, I go back to the metaphor of the runner.
I find that very, very useful,
because running to get somewhere
is far less interesting than running.
Well, that's actually another quote of Salas's,
which we didn't include, I thought it was in it, but it's out,
which he very explicitly says,
that you have to enjoy the journey, it's like the Odyssey.
You have to enjoy the journey, and as he said,
when he got home, it actually wasn't all that great.
Yeah, absolutely.
That's a little more about curiosity, your book curiosity.
Well, I started with the idea of which you asked,
which is why are we curious?
Why do we want to ask questions?
And what are the questions that pushed our thought forward
when we started thinking about who we are
and what this place is that we call the world,
or the universe, and then onwards.
And to see how many times those questions
are against our impulse of labeling,
so that we seem to exist between these two contradictory
impulses of building labels that comfort us,
and having languages that are catechisms and dogmatic,
and then on the other side,
asking questions that destroy those labels
and those catechisms.
And I go into the discussion of what is a permissible curiosity
and what is not, and I use Dante.
I thought it was wonderful when she puts Dante there.
Yes.
We made this film with you in mind.
Thank you.
Because you can hang almost everything,
these questions are in the Comedia,
and they are very useful to illustrate them.
So yes, but going back to the question and the film,
I felt such joy and elation when this higs purf to us.
And again, not discovered, but that we have the courage
of saying we, now you have the courage of saying,
this is there, and so there is something.
Now let's start to revise everything,
throw everything out of the window and start again.
It's extraordinary, and I think that there are so many moments
where we have done that, where we discover that the earth
is round, where we discover gravity.
And those are moments that exist also in painting and dance,
in literature, we certainly say this begins something else.
Although I think actually that brings up really what is it,
sort of a critical difference with art and sciences.
And in some sense, there's consensus in science
when you have proved something.
There's very little consensus.
I mean, there can be an art.
It's easier to refute somebody saying,
oh, this is great, this is not great.
I mean, you're much more subject to subjective interpretation.
I can't argue against that.
Yeah.
Yeah, I mean, there are a few fools who will say
that King Lear is not a good play.
But by and large, there are some things that we,
as humans, agree upon, we don't agree
why they are great or why they move us.
But I think that by and large.
But what about like modern art?
Give it time.
Give it time.
Give it time.
It was modern art.
Yeah.
But I think one of the differences is that at its best,
or at his or her best as scientist is just waiting,
it has a theory, but the work is to understand
if the theory is correct.
The work is not to convince the worlds of the theory
or to build up everything around the theory
to make sure that this idea is the one
that everybody agrees with.
The work is to try to say, is this the right theory
or is this the not right theory?
And so what that means is when somebody refutes,
it's progress.
Yes.
And as opposed to condemnation of you, right?
Having a theory that's then refuted,
well, that's really helpful that you propose this theory.
And the fact that it's not true,
we've made progress through that.
There's no shame, right?
There might be frustration or some disappointment,
but it's progress.
And so I think it's a different.
Yeah, but I agree.
Just so following up on yours, do you think that eventually
Nima's going to like that sculpture?
LAUGHTER
I got pretty good at that.
But I liked it, certainly.
So maybe that's a refutation of his not lighting it.
But style as theory and science takes time to ground itself.
And when you build something, if everybody agrees upon that
at the moment, you know that it's conventional and probably
not of much use.
Yes.
When you have something that needs to be learned
with a different vocabulary, then maybe you
have something that is interesting.
But the artist as a scientist has constantly
to teach us how to look and how to think.
When you said there is curiosity and you kind of left
prohibited curiosity, you used what you have in mind.
Well, from the very beginning of our consciousness
of curiosity, we have discussed what
we should be allowed to be curious about.
So in the Judeo-Christian tradition, for instance,
we were not allowed to eat the fruit of one tree.
All the rest was fine.
But why that particular fruit and why that particular tree?
And this starts a line of thought that is also
found in Greek philosophy and also found in Indian philosophy
that there are certain enterprises that should not
be attempted because they might destroy our comfortable view
of the universe.
Ulysses in Dante is not allowed to go beyond the limits
of the known world.
When he goes there, he falls into a kind of wave
that swallows him.
And that is his last journey.
Because if he gets to that point, which is Mount Purgatory,
our view of the world is destroyed,
the dogma no longer holds.
And so that is considered bad curiosity.
But we have that in science now.
I mean, the whole discussion about in biology,
or how you should be allowed to tamper with genes, for instance,
up to where you can investigate science.
Well, I mean, now Oppenheimer's famous quote
after the detonation of Bonne was, you know,
in the sense that we had to do this.
It was such a beautiful idea, even though, in some sense,
even credited afterwards.
But that it was where our curiosity led.
And then we had to deal with the consequences.
Right.
And so it seems to me an individual fact,
because Sarah said she rediscovered the ability to ask why.
So there was a period where she had lost that ability.
She had it.
She lost it, then she rediscovered it.
And when you talk about your book,
it is clear that you had a lot of questions to ask.
If you didn't have questions to ask,
you wouldn't have been able to write your book.
So there is something that motivates that,
or there is a pressure that some people seem
to have more than others, that keeps wanting you
to keep asking questions as far as the quest for the he expose on.
There is an argument that was made in the movie and so on.
Why are we doing this?
In other words, there is no benefit.
There is, supposedly, we find it then what?
Well, you can't ask that question
when that is your curiosity.
That's what you want to do.
And so I was wondering if you people, all four of you,
who seem to be determined and have that pressure
and you keep going, what is it that is moving you like this?
At the top one.
Well, partly, the confidence that if you keep asking questions,
you will come to a more interesting place.
Because I think that many people are prevented
from asking questions by the idea that if you start
asking questions, you disturb the status quo
and you won't have that comfortable life.
And that applies in politics, in literature, in science.
If you don't ask questions, then everything seems fine.
There's a couple of necessary conditions, I think.
And one of them is the acceptance that failure is
of potential.
So I think that that throughout my life
has been, it showed itself in different ways.
In school, I knew, boy, I'm going to go for it with physics.
There were times when I was very underprepared
because of not having the same kinds of classes going in
that other people did.
But I knew, hey, if this doesn't work, that's OK.
I'll do something else.
My family will love me.
I can fail here.
And that's what gave me the ability to keep going.
And I think I still feel that.
I still feel that if a line of research
that I'm really excited about, that people say is risky.
I work with a topic, the tau lepton.
It's difficult to work with.
And a lot of people say, boy, that's just, why are you
doing that slog?
Because you might not get to that final result.
I feel like that's OK.
It's OK if that doesn't work.
There will be something else.
I'll do something else.
So I think that's one of the necessary conditions
in terms of the pressure.
There was a moment when Nimes says, 15 years.
I've been doing this for 15 years.
And it might not work.
And there goes 15 years.
It was not OK for his perspective.
It's not OK.
That's right.
And just a quick anecdote.
I wrote another book about JP Morgan.
And I didn't know anything about finance.
I just stepped off a cliff.
And I thought, oh, I'll learn it.
Year nine, I was waiting about 4 o'clock in the morning
thinking, I can't do this.
And I can't pay back my book advance.
And so something kept me going.
And I found a way.
But you're on a tightrope all by yourself in some ways.
You don't feel.
Not on the Atlas experiment.
I'm there with 3,000 of my best friends.
And I've made commitments.
I need to wake up at the 4 o'clock meeting time, which I
also have to do because I'm giving a presentation.
Or I'm going to be listening to somebody else's presentation.
So I don't feel alone in it.
I mean, there are times when you're
doing your own calibrating of the springs.
Like I said, the piece of it that is the drudgery piece of it
may be where you can feel very alone.
But no, there are thousands of us who have to work together.
It would be nice to be more alone sometimes in it
and have more control over the decisions.
What are you doing here to topics, though?
And that isn't interesting to me.
That's what I'm curious about.
And then I'm going to ask you why you left physics, OK?
They're long stories, and I'll try to do them very quickly.
Alice James was sort of a fluke.
I was, when I was in college as an English major,
you weren't allowed to think about the life of a writer.
It was just the text.
And then I got out of college and started
reading biographies.
And I thought that was pretty fascinating and great ways
to learn about history and literature.
And I was looking for a subject and Nancy Milford's book
on Zelda Fitzgerald had come out.
And it just seemed like the wives and the daughters
and the sisters of famous men were kind of a good avenue.
I was quite young, so I wasn't going to tackle anything
I thought, very big.
And I came across a reference to Alice James.
I loved Henry James and William as well,
but mainly Henry in college.
And the reference was from a book about Gerald and Sarah
Murphy, who were friends of Scott and Zelda Fitzgerald,
who'd come back from Paris to Cambridge, Massachusetts,
and stopped in on Alice James and her circle.
And I thought, oh, she had a circle.
Maybe she was interesting.
So I quit my job.
I got a tiny advance.
I applied for fellowships.
And then eventually I went back and read that first reference
again, and it took place in 1923, by which time my Alice
had been dead for 30 years.
It was William's wife, who was also named Alice, who
had a circle in Cambridge.
So it was like that she found me, but not quite on purpose.
And then I did.
A productive failure.
Yes, exactly.
And then it took me five years to write that book.
And then I was a book critic at Newsy for about four years.
And I was looking for another subject.
And I really didn't want to do the same kind of story.
People kept coming to me with the daughters and the wives
and the sisters of famous men.
And I didn't want to do a literary story.
I wanted to do a bad guy, actually.
That sort of witch-cassity in the Sundance kid, really seriously.
And a friend at dinner one night said, Robert Barons.
And I thought, oh, that sounds good.
It wasn't really my period of the late 19th century.
I started to read about them.
Morgan seemed the most interesting,
but that he'd been written about so much
I'd have to find someone else.
And my editor pushed me back towards Morgan
and eventually did step off that clip.
I found that the Morgan Library in New York
had a vault of uncatalogged letters, diaries, papers, art history,
art dealers, records, business records.
And I thought, you know, this amazing, big part
of the 19th century in America.
And it hasn't.
He hadn't been done in any depth.
He was such a political figure.
The left crucified him as a terrible robber.
Robert Barons, the right, sanctified him
as a hero of industrial capital.
So I thought, I'll find these in this real documentation
and tell the story.
But I went in with every left liberal female intellectual
preconception you could have.
And it took me a long time to let go of all of that
and to sort of see him whole.
And he didn't find a formula to become rich.
I did not.
All my friends want that.
I want me to know one minute.
But I ended up not thinking he was a robber baron.
Even though that's what I went looking for.
OK.
That was a long answer.
So why did you do physics?
Why did I need physics?
I think it's interesting to reconstruct that time, which
is I really hadn't been thinking about it for a long time.
And I really, you know, it was like 30 years ago.
And I was really in the film world.
And this whole project didn't resuscitate
a lot of these feelings.
One of the fact was it was a bad time for particle theory.
I mean, I was a particle theorist.
It was not a good time.
It was not clear.
They were sort of lost in a lot of details.
There was not a clear accelerator
that was going to provide answers.
Very specifically, I was working in a direction
with somebody that was a little utray.
And it was not the accepted sort of field theory
approach that people were using.
So there weren't a lot of places to go.
I knew I'd have to do a postdoc and several other
places.
So the prospects were not great there.
But I would say more than that, it
was that I discovered something else that was a passion,
that was I was interested in.
And I discovered a film as something
that suddenly I had liked as a kid.
But it was just entertainment.
And I never conceived that people made films.
They just somehow appeared.
And I discovered in particular Eastern European films.
And I suddenly saw something that to me
was a challenging, worthwhile thing to do.
I think I did feel like I wanted
to be doing something that was challenging,
that was interesting, that would give me
a sense of accomplishment.
I mean, I was at some level just attracted to things
that were a challenge, and that I could see films that were
done that really made me think.
I thought that would be interesting too.
And I liked the idea of it being a broader palette.
I met my wife, who was not a scientist.
And I felt my life was very compartmentalized.
And I think it was just that I sort of discovered the arts
and decided, oh, I should explore that a little bit.
And ended up just going and going and going.
And we really didn't do documentaries,
and didn't do anything related to science.
I guess I really wanted to explore the human condition.
I moved from this sort of physical world to the world.
And I always thought that I wanted
to do something that still would explore the science world.
Because as I say, it's not that I became disenchanted
within it.
I still had that feeling of wonder, of what that was,
I mean, what these scientists did.
But I thought I would go back and somehow deal with that
in a fictional world.
And then a particle favor came up.
Is that what drew you to dance as well?
This rediscovery of wonder?
That's an interesting question.
So I think that I kept working in my collaboration with Emily.
So we teach this class together, which
was part of my job, which I love.
I think it's a fantastic one.
I think I was chosen that to be your job, no?
Well, no, I had to teach something.
And yeah, I guess, right, it's part of the Yale curriculum
now.
So somebody was going to teach a class.
I was teaching physics classes.
I could have just been teaching physics classes.
How can you say that?
I can't do that.
Right.
This is a physics class.
I think that I am not a dancer myself.
And I took ballet for a couple of years when I was 12 and 13.
I really loved it.
We do the dance class and physics class in a dance studio.
And I have to say that about 80% of the time,
I'm very deeply uncomfortable.
Because there's a lot of movement that's in the class.
And I'm also challenged constantly by my collaborator,
Emily Coates, who feels that cultural forces and cultural
pressures have a big impact on our scientific laws
and the state of our knowing knowledge and science
right now, which I've always been pushing back on.
I'm not enlightened in some ways.
I didn't take the studies when I was going through college.
So I think it's a very productive level of being
pushed, uncomfortable in every dimension.
And there are times when that's not a good thing.
But I think intellectually for me,
if I have the opportunity to be pushed and to be uncomfortable,
I try to go with it.
That's because of your curios.
Maybe because I'm curious.
And not worried about failure on some level.
Yeah, but it maintains its uncomfortableness.
Do you mean you didn't take the cultural studies,
sort of everything's determined by your society?
So that perspective, so I started out
as very much a humanities person through high school.
I was going to go to law school.
And I wanted to be a constitutional lawyer,
a public defender, something that was at the framework
of our society in this country.
I thought that that's going to be what I do.
And then I started taking physics.
And I realized that my whole picture that I've built up
of the world was completely wrong, totally wrong.
How could I be so absolutely wrong about the laws of nature?
Nothing worked the way I thought that it did.
And it took a long time to swing my brain around
and try to think, and even in terms that would let me access
the world in that way.
And it was just addictive, that challenge.
I think it was so difficult.
So then I became a scientist and a real scientist
in looking for objectivity.
And it's the steps and this process.
And then I think, of course, I wasn't in a total vacuum.
But then to have somebody very seriously in my professional life
say, well, maybe take a different angle on this,
readjust this.
Maybe you're missing a part of the process.
Maybe you're not taking these things into account
with your process.
I think that was another revolutionary moment for me
that probably all of you in this room
have had that maybe the process of science
is influenced by society and who's
been allowed to participate in science,
that that was a revolutionary moment for me to realize.
And so there are many reasons why I continue that conversation.
Maybe there is a difference between the work
that the creative imagination of a writer functions, the way
that it functions, and the way of the imagination
of a scientist functions.
Because I got the impression from the film
and from some scientists that I know
that it is very much a collaborative effort,
but not as much as that teamwork, but simply
that a theory is constructed by many minds at the same time
that you don't just come up with a model of the universe
and put it out there that you imagine maybe this, maybe that,
and you can build it.
A novel instead, unless it's written by several people,
is constructed from the first to the last chapter.
And then you come and you want to publish it
in some medley editor pulls it apart,
but that's another story.
So I think that it's different.
I mean, I wouldn't, I think, be able to construct a book
as a collaboration.
I think that the parallel might be,
in terms of what I've learned about science,
that the idea of the history of an idea
is very difficult to trace.
How did you construct that chapter?
What, from your experience or from your conversation
with someone, was actually pulling into that.
And I think the same is true about scientific ideas.
We do have people, and I'm not one of them,
that the theorists, I'm an experimentalist,
but we do have the theorists like Mima, like David,
people who are pushing in those directions.
And we tend to think of those people as making big leaps,
but the reality is, and they are making big leaps,
but they're also informed by the conversations
that they're having and the collaborations that they're having.
So I think that, for instance, when Hicks was mentioned,
immediately, a number of other names
appeared that said these other people
were looking at the same problem.
Not in communication with each other very much
at that point.
Well, there were three groups, really.
And so there were a couple that were working together.
And Hicks was sort of on his own.
But then there were others that were working together.
But it was an idea that was burbling up.
And it was, I mean, this idea of the single genius theory
is something that I think a lot of people dispute.
I mean, how many really nobody operates in a vacuum?
There have been a couple of big leaps,
and people always bring up Einstein for a couple of things.
But even he, for some of his things in special relativity,
he was working with other ideas as well.
I mean, he did make big leaps.
But I think in particular, the whole idea of the Higgs
that we say now, as I said in the Q&A afterwards,
Higgs was working on a purely mathematical problem, really.
And in fact, the story is that in his initial presentation
of the paper, he didn't even write
that there was a particle associated.
It's supposedly the reviewer said you might want to mention
that there's an associated particle.
And it still wasn't incorporated into the standard model.
That was still done by others by Glass, Schow, and Weinberg,
who then realized that this actually
had a place that it could be the explanation for how
the echometh bosons got mass.
And so it was definitely an incremental thing.
I think, and I think there is a difference
with the theorists in experimentalists.
But I think the interesting thing is that theorists are
the ones that you really do have more this idea that it's
like the single genius coming up with something.
And what you see is it's very collaborative.
There's a lot of talking.
Eventually, they have to go and sit down.
I mean, and I've talked to Sava and Nina
about this both quite a bit.
And they both say the collaboration, it's very important.
But eventually, they have to go and I have to sit down
and just think and try to make that step.
It's all the physicists that you were in contact with.
And you saw, and I guess you said a good bunch of them
are not even in the movie.
Did some of them impress you as being more genius, passionate,
have this push?
Or did they all seem of the same intensity?
No, there's different.
I mean, you know, I mean, Nima's obviously incredibly
intense, and Sava's is more relaxed.
But I don't think that there's a difference in their passion
and their intensity.
I mean, Nima very much was also influenced by Sava's.
He considers, in fact, the interesting thing
is he says that he, Sava's is the person who gave him
the courage to start to go off in different directions.
And interestingly, the multiverse initially, you know,
physicists hated the multiverse initially.
All physicists pretty much.
And Sava's actually was one of the first to say,
maybe we should think about it.
And I think he was doing a visiting term at Harvard
where Nima was.
And he said, you know, maybe we should look at this multiverse.
And Nima says, I said, are you nuts?
This is a total waste of time.
Why would I ever think about the multiverse?
And Sava said, yeah, you might want to look at this.
And eventually, Nima came around.
So I don't think outwardly, you know,
it's maybe a reflection inwardly.
I think both of them are, you know, extremely passionate.
There are different points in their lives though, you know?
And this is something that, you know,
it also gets to your, you know, when you said, well,
Nima's were lamenting 15 years.
Sava's is 30 years is the issue of mortality.
And, you know, for scientists, I mean,
it's for both scientists, for all creative people.
I think science, it's even harder somewhat
in terms of especially for theorists.
And Nima said that he had the young genius theory initially.
He said, you know, and his idea was he would, you know,
they would discover the Higgs.
He'd do all these things.
And by 30, he would have that done and he'd move on, you know?
And of course, you know.
Yeah, now he's not.
And he, you know, I asked him near the end.
So what do you think about this now?
And he sort of laughed and he said, yeah, it's interesting.
I'm sort of revising my ideas now.
He says, I think, and he said, you know, and he laughed.
You know, he realized that this was a little bit self-serving.
But he said, no, he says what he thinks is that,
he said the problem is that when people get older,
they become bourgeois was his term.
And what he meant was that, you know, they get married,
they have kids, they have other things in their life.
And that what he thought was the critical thing was not youth,
but the lack of distraction and the ability
to absolutely, you know, be a jerk if you needed be
to focus on what you were doing.
That's why Sherlock Holmes doesn't get married.
That's why Sherlock Holmes doesn't get married.
So that was what he was thinking with the solution.
And I think that issue of mortality is an interesting point.
And I think, you know, look, honestly,
I think Neema does really, you know,
Neema's in an interesting position.
I mean, he is, you know, he was regarded as the, you know,
hot genius.
And, but nothing that he has done has actually been proven.
I mean, it's so he's recognized for what he's done
and the brilliance and his passion and his insight.
But we don't know if anything is right, you know.
Solace has actually had more things done, but, you know,
nothing completely proven either.
And, you know, I think they're very interesting
to look at the two of them right now.
But this idea of proof is very interesting
because I'm obviously not a scientist.
But I understood that, for instance, Euclid was proven.
And then, certainly, you had the non-Euclidean geometries
and, suddenly, two parallel lines did meet.
And so, does that happen constantly?
I mean, I think what happens, so my view of this is we have
the theory that works in a certain regime.
Maybe it works only at low energy.
It works at slow speeds.
It works at large distance scales.
And then, when we get the ability to move
beyond those limitations, we realize, aha,
that actually Newton's laws are a nice example, right?
The macroscopic world around us.
Force equals mass times acceleration.
I push on something with a certain force.
I'm going to get a certain acceleration for a given mass.
And then, you're confronted with a speed limit to the universe,
the speed of light.
So there's a problem there.
I must not be able to get a certain acceleration
for a given mass with a given force
when you get past that point.
But it doesn't mean that Newton's laws were invalid
or are invalid in a context.
So I think that's what most often happens,
is that we realize that there is context
beyond our initial understanding.
Or things that we didn't think matter do.
You think that's the only matter.
And it's about universes beyond our universe.
What can we do?
Yes.
Yes.
It's also interesting when you're talking about mortality
as playing a role.
And it's almost in some ways it's reflected
by the attachments that one makes to this world.
And quest literature is so focused on the Urquest
Gilgamesh, the very question of mortality
is at the center.
And so much of quest literature is
about a going away and ultimately returning.
Right?
Yes, yes.
Yes, yes.
I mean, the Wizard of Oz.
The Last Lines in the Wizard of Oz is, you know,
Aunt Emma, there's no place like home.
But it's almost it.
Because the Wizard is a failure.
But there's almost a suspension of mortality
in the journey that's taken.
But there's always the return.
And I wonder about that as a feature
that when one is pursuing the quest,
one has to set aside that aspect of experience.
I have a question.
Oh, sorry.
Did you want to answer that?
No.
To go to art for a second.
Because you've written novels as well as nonfiction.
And I would, I mean, in working on nonfiction,
there is a sense that you have evidence
that you're trying things out all the time,
that you're finding what seems true in quotes or something.
But what seems accurate.
And I would imagine there's a process like that for fiction.
Oh, I've got that.
What feels absolutely right to you.
Would you talk a little bit about that?
Well, in both cases, you have to construct a theory
of the universe, a model, whether it's
based on the fact that Morgan ate porridge for breakfast
or wore brown shoes.
Or your invented character did these things.
And what you find out, as you were saying in the film,
is that as soon as you establish one fact,
a multitude of facts follows that if it's brown shoes
and not black, then there are consequences for this
in every direction.
I find it much more difficult to write fiction
than nonfiction.
Because in nonfiction, so much of the work has been done.
And you don't need to have the memory
that you have to have for fiction.
When was he born?
And how many children did he have?
And you have to jot these things down
and invent these archives.
But yes, essentially, they're the same process.
Yes, and I mean, just from my novelist's friends,
there's a sense of true north in some way.
When you have it, you know you have it.
And when you don't have it, you know you don't have it.
That's right.
But it's not until you finish the book.
I know, right.
But you know, it's actually interesting.
Because right now, I am working on a script.
So it's a fiction script.
And it feels exactly like it did what
I was in the edit room at the end of particle favor.
And I think the process is very similar.
And with film, the interesting thing with film
is you go through these different phases.
And the script stage is like theory.
You're coming up with a theory of the world, basically.
And then you go to experiment, which
is like going into film production.
And suddenly, you need lots of money and equipment
and lots of people.
And it's completely crazy.
And you're just getting data.
And especially in film, but I think in physics,
too, to a certain extent, you just
like hope that it's working and making sense.
And then you come back to the edit room,
which is like going back to the theorists.
And it's like, OK, here's the data.
This is what the real world is like.
And you revise your theories.
Or you revise your, you know, the script is now lost.
And you have the film that you have.
And so, you know, the long period in the edit room
was taking all this data.
And what is our story?
And what is, but we were approaching it.
It was like writing fiction.
And that's what people always say.
Anyways, documentaries, it's the editing.
We're writing.
And now I'm working on a script that's a fiction script.
But it's the same process for me.
I have, I mean, even using some of my organizational software,
you know, that I was using in the edit room,
keeping track now of people and stories.
And there is a life to it.
But it's, for me, it's a very similar process.
There's a trying to imagine various outcomes
and what are the ones that work and what
is the thing that is consistent and the characters
have become their own people.
And oh, you start talking like, oh, this person wouldn't do this.
You know, exactly.
And it's so completely parallel.
I mean, I'm just, it's the same.
You offered of the questions useful, I think,
for these creative processes.
Because all the stage of accumulating material
and then putting it together is that quest.
But it's only on that return journey
that you realize what you have, whether it's
a golden fleece or empty hands.
OK.
People want to line up with the microphone
and please identify yourself and keep your comments
in the form of a question.
Hi, my name is Olga Oste.
I'm on the things.
OK.
Fused.
I probably, probably the difference
between scientist and artist, scientist,
the science experiment has to be probable and has to be
repeatable.
And artists usually tries to do something
absolutely original and nobody can repeat it.
And also, I bet I said that probably few fools
consider that King Lear is actually bad play.
I'm not sure about fools, but Leo, Tal's story, famous writer.
Yes, he did not like Shakespeare.
He considered him primitive.
And you know that he wrote this, and won peace, and anacrine.
So probably I don't know if he was fool,
but he was absolutely, of course, very arrogant person.
But still he was like, oh, no, nobody would pay.
OK.
And my question is to Sara, actually.
After you finished your film, I read
that actually exact number, exact mass of Higgs Boson
is 126 plus minus 0.4.
And there are actually theories that didn't
connect to supersymmetry or multivorts that predicted
exactly these number.
But still, my question is, should I get a question?
What do you think is ideal of multivorts more
dead or more alive after all these discoveries?
OK, so that's a great question.
So the mass of the Higgs within the standard model
was actually a predicted number.
Based on all the other information
that we had, the mass of the top quirk, the mass of the W,
all the measurements that we had and our understanding
of how this theory fits together.
If you have a Higgs Boson within the standard model
that functions as evidence for the Higgs field, which
gives us mass, it should be a certain number.
We had a prediction.
And we didn't find the Higgs at exactly that prediction
before the LHC started.
But the idea is, if it's a standard model Higgs Boson,
it's got to be close to that.
It has to be around 118.
A number that's not that far from where we'd actually
explored.
So the further up away from that prediction
within the standard model, the more exciting it is
from the perspective of maybe there's
something else that we have access to through this particle
beyond the standard model.
So that was kind of the excitement there.
If it isn't really far away from the prediction of 118,
so that it must be something else.
So there's that thing that's happening.
How close is this to what we expect from the standard model?
And you could argue about 125.
It turns out to be close enough to the prediction
that it's perfectly consistent with the standard model.
So there you have that.
And then you look at other ideas.
Well, maybe we don't say definitely not standard model.
But even within that close enough to be standard model,
it could actually be something else.
It could be supersymmetry.
It could be the multiverse.
It could be this.
And you look at all of these different spaces
in terms of these different theories
and try to understand what do they
predict for this particle's mass.
What do we learn from that?
And I think the issue with the Higgs at this mass
is that it makes some of our favorite theories
a little bit uncomfortable.
For supersymmetry, I would say a mass of that Higgs boson
means that some of the best motivation for supersymmetry,
you lose at that mass.
So supersymmetry could definitely be reality.
But it wouldn't solve all of the problems
that we hope that supersymmetry would come along and solve.
In terms of the multiverse, I don't
think it gives us information in that it doesn't rule it out
as a possible idea.
I'm sorry, I'm not adding any content beyond the film.
I think it captures pretty well where things stand.
The funny thing about the Higgs, or one of the funny things
about the Higgs is that so many of us
were hoping that it wouldn't be there.
What it does, and I used to say that,
I hope we don't find the Higgs.
And now having been even some small part of the discovery,
I think it's an absurd thing to say, because it was thrilling.
It's amazing that that prediction actually was true.
But the Higgs boson ties up the standard model
really neatly in some ways and doesn't get us beyond.
And we know that there's so many things
about the universe that we don't understand.
It would have been wonderful if the answer
to the generation of mass actually
took us in some step further beyond the standard model.
But I think right now it's inconclusive.
It's consistent with the standard model Higgs.
It doesn't rule out supersymmetry,
though it's making it a little bit less attractive.
And it leaves us with the idea of the multiverse hanging.
And every theorist out there, including probably David Kaplan,
who said, oh, all of my theories are ruled out,
went back and thought about how do I adjust that
so that it actually still works?
I'm sorry, I don't have a better answer.
It's very inconclusive.
I really don't understand this topic too much.
I'm definitely going to research it now that I've seen this movie.
But my understanding is that the Higgs boson
generates the Higgs field, which gives particles mass.
Is that correct?
So if you're on a lake in a boat,
think of the lake as the Higgs fields.
If I add energy to the lake, if I splash the lake,
and this is not my analogy, I should say, my killedrith,
thank you wherever you are, if I splash the lake,
that's an excitation, I've added energy to the lake,
there's a wave that goes out.
The wave is the Higgs boson.
The evidence for the Higgs fields existing
is the fact that when you add energy to it,
you actually have a particle that's created.
So the Higgs boson tells us that there's this field
everywhere in the universe.
And it's the Higgs field everywhere in the universe
that gives us a way to have mass for particles.
OK, that.
And so the other thing I wanted to ask
was, would it be possible to explain to layman
the more of the mechanism in terms of which the Higgs field
makes particles have mass?
Look at the little film that she did.
Right, so we did.
Yeah, I think so.
Here's how I think about it.
You have to first understand what the definition of mass
is, because how do we think of mass?
We think of mass as the more mass I have that's
kind of like the more stuff, right?
So if we're going to think about mass
from a perspective of the Higgs boson and particles,
let's shift our thinking a little bit.
OK?
A massless particle.
So a particle out there with no mass, like the photon.
So the photons coming to my eyes.
They're light particles.
Now I can't see you anymore.
A massless particle travels at the speed of light.
It has no choice.
A particle that has no mass, fundamental particle,
travels at the speed of light.
OK?
Particles that do have mass can't travel at the speed of light.
They can't get up there.
As much force as you put on them, they can't get up there.
So the question of mass is slowing things down.
How is it that we slow things down?
What is the mechanism that means that some things
can't move at the speed of light,
that all the massless particles move at?
It's kind of similar to the idea of mass as stuff, right?
The more mass you have, the harder you are to get going.
Maybe you'd say, I don't know if it works perfectly.
So the idea of the Higgs field being the mechanism for that
is that this Higgs field, some particles
it can't slow down at all.
It doesn't have any interactions with them.
OK?
Those are the massless particles.
So the photon travels through the Higgs field.
The field is there.
But it doesn't have any interaction with it.
Other particles that do have mass, they see the field.
They're slowed down by it.
It's like they're traveling through molasses.
And the more they see the field, the more they interact
with the field, the more slowed down they are,
the more massive they are.
So I would say that's the mechanism for how it works.
I think you leave many of us wishing you'd been our first
picture.
Yes.
And I'm just thinking.
Yes, we are.
There you go.
Can we only end telling the truth?
We're all great, great, great, great, great, great.
Hey, I had a question for Mark.
And you were talking about how the creative process
for creating, I think, films, parallels
the process of, I guess, progress in theoretical physics.
And I was wondering about, in terms of your background,
have you found that your background informs
your artistic sensibilities in different ways
than the people that you're sort of working with?
Like, do you find, not just in terms
of domain-specific knowledge that was probably useful
for particle fever, but more nebulously in the process,
do you find that you see things differently or think
about things differently, I guess?
I don't think in an obvious way.
But I mean, I certainly can't deny my background.
I think there are certain ways that I think.
But I think there's a certain logic
that I apply to things.
I don't feel I look at things as a scientist.
People always say that, oh, I don't know what that means.
It's the way I think.
As I say, I feel the process of writing and writing
something fiction is exactly the same as when I'm sitting
in an editor room.
And I assume I'm using certain processes of logic
that are also what I used when I was doing theoretical physics.
And so I will make that comparison.
When I was in graduate school, when
I was doing theoretical particle physics,
it was a very similar process.
Somebody asked me after the Q&A, how
did I make that transition?
Practically, it didn't feel all that different.
Yes, I think I have a certain logical way
that I approach things.
But when I was doing theoretical physics,
I was sitting in a room by myself with a pencil and paper,
coming up with a theory of the universe,
not getting paid very much as a grad student.
And then I started writing a script,
and I just changed rooms.
I can't help, but I was still sitting there
with a pencil and paper thinking about the way more
humans interacted.
But with a certain logic that you apply to it,
and to me, it felt very similar.
So I don't know.
I think the creative process is the creative process.
And you have certain ways.
I mean, I do know that I can see that I approach certain things,
and there's a certain logic.
But that's a fundamental thing that
doesn't have to do with science either.
I don't think.
I think that any artist is applying a certain logical process
and working out the consequences that's similar.
I don't know if there's a meta-level at which the brain is
working that jumbles things together.
I wouldn't know.
I just think the way I think.
But I think, for me, the process is extremely similar.
I have questions.
I can't see you.
You have to go.
While you're going there, I'll tell a quick Einstein joke,
OK?
That supposedly a reporter came to interview him.
I have no idea what this is true.
I read it somewhere.
It's probably not true.
And said, Professor, where do you get your ideas?
And Einstein said, what do you mean?
And he said, well, do you get them
when you're taking a walk or in the bath
or playing your violin?
And Einstein thought for a moment and said, actually,
I've only had one or two.
OK.
So my question, it actually sort of arose
when you were discussing Savos.
And I remember from the movie, he said
that he told us anecdote of how paradise to him was frightening
and he started to cry.
And it just made me start to think about fear
and fear as how it plays in the role of a quest.
Or it's role in a quest.
So I guess I was just wondering how for you, for you guys,
what was your experience with fear?
Does it have a role in what you do?
Does it drive you to, as Savos would do,
go find what exists out there?
I mean, there is a certain fear.
I mean, certainly there were points in particle fever
where I had a fear that this was not going to add up
to anything.
I mean, I always thought that it would at some way.
But the fear of creating something
that nobody responds to, that people don't understand.
I mean, it was a long process.
We tested the film at various along the way.
And I mean, it's an interesting thing with a process where
you're working intensely and you think, oh, yeah, OK, I've
got it.
And you show it to people and they don't get it at all.
And you think, wow, OK, now I have to go back.
And there's a certain fear that for me, it drives me on.
I mean, I would say that.
I don't, I think fear makes me work harder.
It doesn't make me run.
So I guess that's my own personal reaction so far, anyway.
Yeah, well, failure is an option.
Yes.
It's a feared option.
So I think that's definitely true.
And with every book you write, it doesn't really matter
that you've written another book.
The new one could be a disaster.
I mean, it's got its own constraints and requirements.
And you don't know you can do it.
So you have to compliment fear?
So it's just so fascinating to me as it's
sort of coming out with your dialogue.
So fear can you thrive to you.
But it's also you need to learn to be successful and quest
to sort of conquer fear at the same time.
For me, there is an interesting fear that happens rarely
where I think if this works out, it
changes what I wanted to do.
It changes the way I was thinking about the subject.
And that's a big fear because it forces you
to start all over again.
But when it happens, you know that you're
onto something interesting.
I think it may also be a question for me
of how deeply you are into it.
So the longer the further I went, the more at stake
I felt about not failing and pushing and pushing and pushing.
I mean, I don't know.
At an earlier stage, there might be a wisdom
in an earlier stage sometimes of a banning.
And you do that in a minor way all the time.
I mean, in a minor way, you try an approach
and you have to make a quick assessment.
No, that's not going to pay off.
And I have to go in a different direction.
But you learned from that.
You learned from that.
That's the way Sarah was saying.
That's true.
Actually, you know, it reminded me.
I forgot it.
When you said it, a quick thing, it was Whitehead who said
that in philosophy, when you come up
against a contradiction, that's the end.
And in science, it's the beginning.
And I thought that was a very interesting point, which
relates to what you said, too.
And to pick up your image of the quest, which I find very
interesting and useful, any quest that's
engaged without fear is not worth engaging.
It's also a minor degree.
You have a certain amount of fear.
It can motivate you if it gets to be too much fear.
You know, that's what I mean.
One of my favorite quotes is what Einstein wrote back when
he was asked to describe his process.
And he said, first, everything came in the form of images.
And then he felt the deep emotional desire to communicate.
And that's what led him to create formulas.
I think that's so beautiful because it's an imagination,
emotion, and the desire for communication, which has to
be part of science.
And so that's a little bit of a background to the question
which may otherwise sound a little bit out in left field.
But I'm really struck at now how neuroscience departments are
hiring physicists, and that there's some way in which
neuroscience is bringing the psyche together, which is the
source of imagery and emotion with the sciences.
So I wondered, I think Yale has started on that as well, yes?
So I'm not in the neuroscience department at Yale.
So yeah, I can't speak for them.
I think that I can try to answer it in some way and then see
how other people feel.
I think that one of the miraculous things about Einstein
and his theories was he was working with physics that we
can't directly relate to, meaning, speed of light,
special relativity in particular, speed of light,
length contraction, time dilation, these things that we
don't actually experience.
And he set up very straightforward thought experiments.
He put you on a train and had you turn on a flashlight.
And he had two brothers or two astronauts and one of them
travel and the other one stay at home.
He set up images in some ways, stories, places that let you
access that contradiction with something that you did
understand.
And I think that that is incredibly powerful.
It's something we're floundering with with the Higgs,
for example, to have this be something that we all can
grapple with in ways that we can understand.
I think that the ability that we have to imagine or to have
actual images associated with what we're trying to understand,
with the frameworks that we have, is really tied into how
much progress we can make in terms of our scientific theories.
So those two things, that's the only access I have to
trying to answer your question.
I don't know.
In the March round table, Rob read the background of the
people.
So we have neuroscientists, but one of the people of that
round table on the subject of consciousness is a physicist.
So there is no question.
And one of the people who's been at the round tables here a
couple of times, Andrea California, who's a top-notch
microbiologist who is close to discovering significant
things about cancer.
And he always says, he always thought he would go to
physics, discover something, go to microbiology, discover
cure of cancer, and then discover the cure of Alzheimer's.
He's about to move to the Alzheimer's territory.
And he was a physicist.
So I think physics gives us tools to tackle complicated
problems and to model complicated systems.
And a lot of the, yeah, so I think there's a natural way
that the different branches in science can interact with
each other.
More and more.
Yeah, yeah.
I'd like to touch on something that Mark brought up about
the scientist as genius.
And it seems like the Saren project with 3,000
scientists, many of the major leaps, at least in the past
in science like with Einstein, he was a lowly patent clerk in
Beren when he did his four major papers on the photoelectric
fact and his first theory is a relativity.
And I was thinking about Copernicus, who was a church
canon when he developed his helocentric theories, even
though there had been prior helocentric theories going back
to ancient Greece.
But in some cases, the mere fact that you have collaborative
effort, in Germany, they said that Einstein was a Jew and
therefore his science was Jewish science, which was less
accurate.
And they burned his books.
So the mere fact of having collaboration, in some cases,
waters down science.
So that's why you have, in many cases, the great leaps in
science, at least in the past.
You also had gentleman scientists, Le Boisier and others,
who would be in their little laboratory.
But they wouldn't necessarily have to listen to 20 other
guys.
And I was thinking again about Einstein, where 20 years at
Princeton working on his field theory, he accomplished not a
lot.
Whereas in one year as a Beren patent clerk, he wrote four
earth-shattering theories.
So is it better, and again, going back to this genius theory
of scientists, that isn't it better to be the little guy in
the corner that everybody says you're wrong than being
with the 3,000 people who say, this is what the consensus is.
And just like with the Ptolemaic theory of the universe
versus the Copernican theory, if you're going to go with the
consensus, you're going to go with Ptolemaic.
But if you're Copernicus, you're going to say, wait a
second.
I think that the sun is the center, not the earth.
I would push back.
Well, I think we need to get at the reason that there are
thousands of us who are gathered at CERN working on this
together.
We are at the point where we are colliding protons at 99.
99999999% of the speed of light.
People have described that enterprise.
I don't remember if this was in the film or not.
But people have described the enterprises, the
cathedrals of our time.
The amount of resources that you need to muster, the ideas
that go behind it, the building of the structure, the lone
person working in the corner is not going to make a large
Hadron Collider.
This is a $7 billion machine.
So I think that a lot of the collaboration, it's part of
what makes it so fascinating.
As a species, if we're going to take the next step in this
exploration, we need to pool our resources, financial,
intellectual, passion.
We need to all bring that to bear to answer some of these
questions.
Now, what we're doing at CERN is testing theories.
And coming up with ideas for sure.
But a lot of the intellectual work that we're doing is
trying to figure out how with this physical experimental
apparatus, we can access something like supersymmetry
or the multiverse or go after some of those ideas.
So there certainly is still room for people in different
pockets around the world to be thinking on their own.
But the enterprise at CERN is justified and required and
yeah, an incredible challenge.
And I would say, with respect to Einstein, I don't think
that most people think that if Einstein was tackling
Grand Unified Theory when he was 20, he would have solved
it.
I think it's also very much a matter of the time and the
problems.
And this is another thing that Sava says that I think is
really, really very trenchant at the beginning where he says,
what distinguishes a great scientist?
You have to know what's the right question to ask.
And it has to be the right time for there to be a solution
that you can understand.
And that time when Einstein was coming up with a
photollectric effect and relativity, it was the right time.
And he made advances.
But it was about asking the right questions as almost the
first question.
I mean, the first issue.
He knew the question asked and it was the right time and
there was the right things happening.
It was the time to solve it.
And that's what Sava says.
Really, the time to solve it was then.
And I don't know that it would have been different later.
I mean, because there are many brilliant people that have
come since Einstein and have tackled these problems and the
time hasn't come to get it yet.
So.
OK.
Any other questions?
Yes.
Among the points of intersection art and science.
I'm a painter and was male in graduate school.
Was there representation?
Well, landscape painter, which always kind of irritated me
because I always just considered a painting.
So down the road, having done a lot of paintings, so you can
be painting like the energy and inherent nature, whatever
that meant, or seemed to mean.
And then reading about or hearing that, well, scientists
consider the nature of things as chaotic, swarming,
intersecting energies or patterns, chaotic patterns.
Somehow, it's come out in the work in a weird kind of way.
I just was curious what physicists would have to say
about that.
I don't think I'm illustrating science, but some of these
coming out of the work.
Pollock said, when somebody said, why don't you pay nature?
He said, I am nature.
The materials nature, the materials energy.
I'm energy.
Makes sense?
That's interesting.
So I have a colleague who, well, so one of the theories
that's really challenging to interact with
is quantum mechanics, I think, where
you have probabilities that are governing what will happen
or what will be measured, as opposed
to push a box and see how far it will slide before it stops.
So I have a colleague who says that he thinks in terms
of quantum mechanics.
And he said this to me multiple times.
And I always ask him, I say, I don't
believe that you think in terms of quantum mechanics,
because you couldn't drive a car if you think
in terms of quantum mechanics.
It's just not possible.
So maybe what you're asking, or maybe what you're saying,
is that you're removed from a framework of the macroscopic
or of how we tend to look at the landscape
and seeing something else there.
And I think that people have used that kind of art
to try to access ideas within physics of quantum mechanics.
It's almost like I get the civic time
that inverters and power planets have to go about the energy.
But it's interesting, because also,
when you're saying that your collaborator accuses you
of having a scientific cultural bias,
that you're being affected by cultural bias in science,
I actually see it going much more the other direction.
That I do see people, I mean, it's
fascinating even from a language,
a linguistic perspective.
Quantum is used in so many instances.
It has nothing to do with science.
There are so many instances of this
where popular culture has taken over these words.
And I think one of the really interesting things
that I thought about a lot during making a film,
and general is that in both science and art,
in the beginning of the 20th century,
what happened is very significant,
that in both cases they went to abstraction.
And so before that, painting was very literal
and science was very literal.
Anybody of sort of normal intelligence,
you can understand laws of physics and painting.
And suddenly in both the arts and the science,
we went to abstraction and it required specialists.
And that seems to have a dialectical language.
I don't need to electrolyze it.
Just do it.
It's about a flow of work.
But just whether it's good painting or a bad painting,
I think you can see it.
I think that there's been throughout history,
back and forth between science and art.
And there's a very interesting book Leonard Schlaine wrote
called Physics and Art.
And he looks at the parallels in which,
in often in many instances, art led science
in terms of making and breakthrough,
in terms of perspective, in terms of light,
in terms of many things.
So I would say what you're feeling
is the end of a long process that's been ongoing.
He used to be going.
It's fascinating what this all about,
what the time the editor is.
Yeah.
OK.
I'd like to thank all of you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
