you
you
do
Well, it being the noon hour here in New York City, I want to welcome everyone and wish
you a good morning, good afternoon or good evening depending on where you're viewing
the Zoom roundtable.
This is I think our third Helix Center roundtable for which we've relied on the Zoom format.
And of course that's due to the COVID pandemic.
We're trying to do the best we can to make the best of it.
I think so far these Zoom meetings have been quite lively and interesting.
So before I tell you about today's roundtable, I want to make just two very brief announcements
and those relate to our upcoming roundtables scheduled for March 20th.
We will have a roundtable on placebo and the placebo and no-cibo effects.
That should be very interesting.
And then either on April 17 or 24th to be determined, we're going to have a talk on stress.
And right now we're not stressing out about which data is exactly, but we should be able
to have that nailed down shortly.
Today we have a really wonderful panel of discussions convened to discuss this topic
of populism.
And before I get things underway, I want to just say a word, a brief word about each
of our discussions and in the interest of equity, I'm going to do this in alphabetical
order.
Jeffrey Alexander is the Lillian Shavinson, Sade and Professor of Sociology at Yale University,
founder and co-director of Yale's Center for Cultural Sociology and co-editor of the
American Journal of Cultural Sociology.
A social theorist whose early work challenged the anti-cultural reductionism of classical
and modern sociology, Alexander has worked with generations of students and colleagues
to create a quote strong program unquote in cultural sociology.
Alexander has also developed the civil sphere theory, a macro sociological model of democracy
and the forces that can undermine it.
He is currently organizing a series of conferences and edited a book project, The Civil
Sphere in Latin America, The Civil Sphere in East Asia, bridging the civil order radicalism
and civil sphere.
Don J. Jaganathan is a philosophy professor and also classical studies professor at Columbia
University, his academic research centers on Aristotle's ethics and political philosophy
and contemporary virtue ethics.
He's also written about issues at the intersection of philosophy and literature, including on
tragedy and the novel.
At present he is completing a book manuscript entitled Aristotle's Practical Epistemology,
which seeks to situate Aristotle's theory of practical wisdom within his views of knowledge
and understanding and thereby to explain why Aristotle thinks of practical wisdom as an
extraordinary achievement as equivalent to political wisdom.
Thakas Pappas has a PhD from Yale in political science.
He's a Greek author and researcher currently associated with the University of Helsinki
in Finland.
Formerly a professor of comparative politics at the University of Thessalonica in Greece
is also held teaching and research appointments at the universities of Strasbourg, Oslo,
Freiburg, Luxembourg, Central Europe University, and Budapest, European University in Florence,
Yale, and Princeton.
Among his books are Making Democracy in Greece, The Charismatic Party, and Populism and Crisis
Politics in Greece.
And lastly, Harry L. Watson is an Atlanta distinguished professor in Southern culture
in the history department of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
A native of Greensboro, North Carolina, he received his bachelor degree from Brown University
and his doctorate from Northwestern before joining the UNC history department in 1976.
His teaching and research interests focus on American political history, the early American
Republic, and the Antebellum South.
He served as director of the UNC Center for the Study of American South from 1999 until
2012, and an editor of its journal, Southern Culture, from 1993 to 2019.
He is the author or editor of eight books, including Andrew Jackson versus Henry Clay,
Democracy in Development and Development in America, Liberty in Power, the Politics of
Jacksonian America, and Building the American Republic, A Narrative History to 1877.
Okay, that they're with, I'm going to open up our conversation by asking each of our
discussants to make some comments about how they define populism, and I want to make it
clear at the outset that I think everyone will agree that the term populism is not something
it has an exact and precise definition, but it's something that we all at some point seem
to be wrapping our minds around, and then especially recently with the developments in
our modern history, I think it's become a very hot topic.
So I throw it open.
Who wants to take a quick shot at just making a quick definition so we can get things underway?
Well I don't know if that's a student or any account, if I may, if everybody else is going
to be shy.
First of all, thank you very much for inviting me to participate.
I look forward to this as being very interesting.
It seems to me that you're very right to stress that populism is a fuzzy category, but it seems
to me, almost always to refer to a mass movement, usually a mass political movement but not
always, of a large group of people who define themselves as simply the people, usually not
subdivided further than that, they usually have agreements against elites who may feel
have deserved them and who are not too, who are there to serve the people but have not.
And the people are asked to replace, overthrow, displace these elites and govern more directly
themselves.
Sometimes the people also define themselves against a subordinate group and they regard
as also undeserving and who perhaps are allies of elites who are working from both ends,
as it were, against the people.
Yeah I think I can endorse quite a lot of that.
What I want to add is I think something that distinguishes a lot of populist movements is
that it's not just that they want to define a group of people as the people, but also
that the people are kind of repository for certain kinds of qualities that are underappreciated
by that elite that the people are defined in relation to.
So I think coming from a kind of classical perspective, populist movements, you might
say, appeal to the virtues that the masses possessed that are not commonly recognized
and that it's a reaction to a construal of the people as lacking those virtues and deserving
only secondary forms of political or social participation.
I can go with that.
Can we begin talking without?
Yeah.
So I will go next.
And I beg to differ here because I do not believe that optimism is a fuzzy category and
I think that we can arrive at exactly the precise definitions of that.
But before that, let me take a different approach here.
My concern is when we talk about populism is why do we care about populism and why do
we care about it now?
And I think that there are, we're talking about modern populist here.
Of course, there have been populist phenomenon history from, you know, from the Greek demagogues,
for example, to the Romare public and all the way down to our own days, right?
But we're talking about modern populist now.
So what is very interesting about populism and about our concern about populist is that
first it is a novelty.
It is a new phenomenon that emerges in the aftermath of World War II in the liberal democracies
that developed after the end of World War II.
Secondly, it is a geographically diffused phenomenon.
We see that firstly in Latin America, then it comes into Europe in the late 70s and then
it expands to the United States.
Thirdly, it is a very ambivalent phenomenon.
We have left-wing populist and right-wing populist.
And sometimes they come together very nicely and neatly like it happened in my country
a few years ago.
And finally, the fourth factor that makes populist such an intriguing phenomenon is
that it has a strong impulse for autocracy.
Although populist leaders come into power by the ballot box, okay, it has a very, very
strong impulse for authoritarianist for autocracy.
We saw that in the United States quite recently.
Now, all of those four factors lead us to a very, very simple definition.
If we put them together and my definition has two words.
It is the most minimal definition you can get around.
There's nothing more minimal than that.
So I define populism in my work.
I've been here in this area for many, many years actually working on populist democracy.
So I define that as democratic liberalism.
So it is a system, it is a political party or a party.
So it's for a system or a leader if you like any kind of level of unit of analysis that
abides by the rules of democracy, but not by the rules of post-war liberal democracy.
It is a democratic, illiberal kind of rule.
And I will leave it here for the moment.
But illiberal democracy and illiberal democracy, a democracy that is not liberal.
By the way, this is the question used by Viktor Orban.
I think a lot of the people wouldn't agree with Orban's definition.
But I don't think there's anything to argue with any of these definitions.
And people who are listening to this podcast have to realize that this word is a fuzzy
concept.
And anybody who says that they have a precise definition is just taking a position in the
field of discussion.
And that definition will stand for certain other associated positions.
I would like to argue, I would like to add on to these, I don't have any disagreement
that with a few questions, one, populism isn't a post-war phenomenon that it goes back to.
Certainly, it's endemic to, in fact, it's endemic to a Republican idea of democracy.
It's a theme, it's a dimension, and it's a strain.
Why is it a strain?
Because a democracy, let's just call it, always has a reference to the people.
It always has a presupposition that there is a civil community regulated by law and that
the people vote and elect somebody.
So you're never going to have a democratic process, even if it's a relatively elitist
18th century process or something more incorporated like the one we have now, that doesn't have
continuous references to the people.
The people should rule.
This movement is on behalf of the people, et cetera.
Obama, who's not a populist, had populist dimensions, he talked constantly about the
people.
The other thing is I'd say that there's a continuum of populism, therefore, that moves
from within the institutions of democracy to beyond what I call radical populism, which
breaks then the institutions and results in one man or one woman rule on the left or the
right.
I certainly agree with the idea that there's a kind of endemic feature that, especially
in Republican politics, because lowercase-R Republican politics has this internal tension,
and you can see populism as one kind of way that that tension comes to the surface.
I think as one of the prompts for this panel, we got this quote from either Madison or Hamilton
from the Federalist Papers about how even if every opinion citizen had been a Socrates,
a group of them would still have been a mob.
This idea that when you, for Republican politics to work, you need a suitable number of people
who are fit to the task of governing, but who in governing represent, in some sense,
the will of the people and are accountable to them, but whom the people as a whole see
is better than that.
That particular intrinsically elite dimension of Republican forms of democracy is, I think,
unpopular in the 20th century and the 21st century.
It's no longer seen as appropriate to regard the political elite as superior in virtue
or in decision making or anything like that.
As a result, I think that explains why populist movements have emerged.
It's the suspicion of a governing elite who are better at the job than the rest of us.
We can see other circumstances in which these kinds of suspicions have broken forth in the
past where elites have not done a good job of maintaining the illusion, let's say, at
least of governing well or of representing the will of the people or remaining accountable
to them.
I do think it's intrinsic to Republican politics because it has this combination of a popular
basis and the establishment of a governing class.
I'd like to endorse that.
I think that's very well put.
My perspective as an American historian focuses my attention, I guess, so I'm less familiar
with some of the other examples, but if we restrict populism to the post-World War II
period, it leaves out the biggest episode in American history that's been labeled as
populist ever since it happened.
That was the uprising of the emergence of the so-called People's Party of the 1890s.
I think going back, there have been several conspicuous occasions in American history
again where movements have appeared that say the people have inherently more virtue than
the elites.
While it's true that virtue is essential to Republican government, we, the people, have
more of it than those stuff shirts at the top and we demand that they be displaced and
replaced by people who are more authentic representatives of our will.
I think that was very much a characteristic of Andrew Jackson's political movement.
I think they're going back into episodes like the Whiskey Rebellion or the North Carolina
regulation even in colonial period at times, there have been mass movements with populist
features like that.
I think that's one of the benefits of calling it, of using a fuzzy definition because you
can legitimately talk about a movement with populist features without getting utterly bogged
down into whether it fits this box exactly or that one.
Okay, let me try to link some dots here if I may.
Do we care about populist mass historians?
That would be fine, of course, and populist has been out there in history since Memorial
Times.
I mean, all societies have been divided between elites and the people, right?
If you go back to the Roman Republic, for example, you can find the party that is called
the Populares, that was the party that went against the Senate, against the optimatists,
and the tribunes of the plebs like Tiberius Grák, who's, for example, his brother, Gaius
Grák, who's were populist leaders.
And this is why they were assassinated because they went against the Senate, against the elites
of that time.
And if you go all the way up to today, you find many, many populist movements.
I mean, no one doubts about that, and when it comes to the United States, Michael Kazan
has written a marvelous book about populist in the United States since the 19th century.
But and of course, Jackson was a populist leader.
I mean, he was divisive.
He was the one who relied on the spoiling system.
And those are phenomena that we see in contemporary populist galore, I mean, polarization, patron
of politics, et cetera, but it's not the reason.
I mean, we're not historians.
I mean, we care about populist because-
Wait a minute.
I am.
Yes, you are.
You are.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, I mean, yes.
I mean, we the people, the ordinary people, okay, we are not historians like, you know,
like you.
Now, it affects our lives.
I mean, this is why there is this booming thing about since 2016, actually, about populist,
because populist and populist governments affect our lives.
And this stands on two puzzles.
This presents us with two puzzles.
First, how can that populist emerges in recent times in our liberal democracies?
We used to live in liberal democracies.
Now, something is happening here.
We see one of those guys who are not liberal, pull, do, period.
What do we do with that?
How can we deal with that?
And secondly, what would populism, if successful as it sometimes is, how does it do to liberal
democracies?
How can people like Chavez or Bond, Trump, et cetera, how, what can they do to our lives
for liberal democracies?
So this is why I focus on the modern times, because I'm not a historian, first of all.
And secondly, because I care about the future, my future and my children's future.
I want, can I respond to that?
Yeah, I think, you know, one of the things that a historical perspective offers you is
alternatives to liberal democracy.
I mean, I think it depends a little bit on how optimistic or pessimistic you are about
the liberal project in the post-World War II period.
And if you feel that there are, you know, that the, for instance, the rise in economic
inequality over the last 50 years is a, you know, it's a feature, not a bug of the liberal
order.
It's a consequence of concentration of certain kinds of power in the hands of some people.
Then you might not be so optimistic about thinking, well, what we need to do is to get
back to that.
I'm very suspicious of Golden Age thinking whether it's looking back to the 17th century
or looking back to the 1950s.
And you know, if there are vulnerabilities in our form of life, our form of political
life, then looking to some of the alternatives and thinking in historical terms can give
you perspective.
And I think this applies, you know, even when you're thinking sort of cross-constitutionally,
I find it very illuminating to think about the groggy and their land reforms when I'm
trying to understand what Narendra Modi is up to, you know, how he came to power on the
back of the struggles of ordinary farmers in India and the kind of land reforms that
he's put into place.
Monty is not the tribe, you know, the blabs.
Monty is the prime minister.
So he's the senate.
Yeah.
It is here to draw the analogy.
Go ahead, Jeff.
I mean, I think that most of the populism that people are afraid of most but not all
is populism of the extreme right today.
There are some exceptions like Manuel Lope has Obrador in Mexico.
But the fear, the ones that move to the right usually combine an anti-elitist movement on
behalf of the people with a deep person with, well, that's part of populism on the left,
extreme left.
But also with bigotry and anti-Semitism, anti-Islamism, some kind of anti-civil discourse that targets
not just an elite.
I think one of you referred to that earlier, but another group as a tremendous danger.
So that the country that they or the people that they want to set up are ethnically homogeneous
group.
The left populist is not as concerned usually with that, but thinks more in terms of the
class so that there's a pure class that they will represent and they'll come to power.
But they're also just at Sanders because they will then possibly well eliminate members of
all the other classes that the people don't represent.
I was interested in this reference to virtue because of course, virtue is also, I don't
want to say, I don't want to keep repeating that it's a fuzzy category, but it's certainly
not something easily defined or it can take it tomes to define virtue.
And yet it seems to be an engine, the issue of virtue and who has it seems to be an engine
driving these conflicts.
And I think similarly, this is the idea of who are the elites because I think elitism
also has been changing over time.
What exactly, who are those people?
Just a moment.
Just a moment.
I mean, populist comes into power quite often.
I mean, it has happened in many, many places.
Not only with left-wing populist like in Venezuela, for example, think about Soutes and Maduro.
Think about my little country Greece.
We have had our share of left-populism for many, many years under Papindreo and under
Tupras more recently or under right-wing governments.
Now what happens here is when they come into power, they become the elites.
How do we deal with that?
I mean, populists have been in power in several countries for many, many years.
They are the elites.
It is very simple or simplistic to say that those are against the elites because they
do become elites.
Think about Trump.
Think about Orba.
He has been in power since 2010, 11 years now.
First, secondly, if I may, left-wing populist, right-wing populist, I alluded to that earlier,
often come, they form a tandem and they rule together.
This happened again in my country in 2015 until 2019 for four years, full years.
A populist party, Syriza and a right-wing party, a stream right-wing party, a native party,
independent Greeks, rule together.
No problem there.
Or think about Peronism in Argentina.
Peron was a right-winger.
And today, the Peronist party, the judicialist party, is a left-wing party under the Kirchner.
So, it is not that simple.
So you're making it simple by arguing that left and right are the same.
This is a common argument of people who attack populism, which is, well, there's no real
difference between the left populism and the right.
In fact, there's a great deal of difference.
I mean, going back to what Donaje said, if there are vast structural inequalities in
a country that has a democratic form of government, there have to be, and there should be, constant
movements to overthrow the people who have privilege or to restructure the society.
Now as long as you have democratic institutions, that's not going to end up in an anti-democratic
form of power.
It will be metabolized in various ways.
But these populist threads, I think, throbbed through the history of all stratified societies
that have democratic forms of government.
I actually want to say something that might be surprising given what I said earlier,
which is that I actually, you know, I think in our contemporary global context, I want
to endorse what Taka said about the contrast between populism and liberalism, because I
think that is the most illuminating pairing of phenomena.
But I think, you know, one way in which the, I mean, there are left liberals and right
liberals, and I think this helps us get some clarity on the differences in the origins
of fluffing and right populism.
And in particular, I think there are different kinds of elites or phenomena of elite capture
that drive populist movements.
And this might be one of the reasons there's overlap between the left and the right, because
it's not all economic.
If it were just about economic elites and a corresponding sort of class critique, then
we would not expect left and right wing populism to overlap.
But in addition to economic elites or phenomena of economic inequality, there's also, I think,
political and cultural phenomenon.
So I think this is especially true in the United States context where economic, political
and cultural capital come apart in very visible ways.
You can think about Wall Street, K Street and Hollywood.
That's kind of the totemic, you know, things to pin this on.
So you know, as has been documented extensively, especially in recent years, we have this phenomenon
stagnation of wages and rising economic inequality in this country.
But the government, I think related to that, but separate, conceptually separate from that
is the fact that our government institutions are increasingly responsive to certain kinds
of private interests.
And people don't feel like they have the possibility of political accountability.
And that's for a wide range of reasons, including our campaigns, our electoral system and our
campaign finance system, lots of other reasons.
Those are the things that I care about the most.
But, and then there's a kind of phenomenon of cultural elitism, where, you know, I think
we've lost a kind of mass culture that we have had in the past in various ways, which
help to unite people across different kinds of social strata.
And you know, there's a kind of, there's a sort of pluralism, a form of cultural pluralism
that has taken hold in elite institutions, like universities, and many of us are affiliated
with the media, certain other kinds of institutions, that I would call a pluralism without aspiration.
It says that people are essentially different from each other, and we don't have any common
values around which to unite, and you have to accept these essential differences and
not try to make common cause with people across those differences.
And I think that that particular cultural phenomenon has driven a kind of popular insurgency in
the United States that crosses the left-right wing distinction.
Whereas I think when it comes to the economic issues, and I think to some extent the political
issues, that's been much more polarized.
And I think those things stand much more behind the success of someone like Bernie Sanders
and Democratic Party politics than it does explain the rise of Donald Trump.
But famously it was documented that in the 2016 election, people who actually were at
the bottom of the economic poll went for Clinton over Trump by some extent, which put the lie
to the idea that this is an economic populism that was really driving the Trump phenomenon.
So I think because of this sort of plurality of forms of elitism or elites and the ways
of these come apart, I think you actually have overlapping populist energies that can
get sucked into different forms of populism across the political spectrum.
John Rawls had written in laws of people that liberal democracies had a sort of, I'd
call it a homious static principle where liberal people educated in liberal democracies
grew to value the democratic process so much so that they would not allow it to slip back
into tyranny.
And I think latter day developments and developments in history sort of put the lie to that approach
and perhaps overly optimistic.
Well, I think if you've got democratic forms that have created results that are profoundly
alienating, disillusioning, engraving to those who define themselves as the people, then they
may decide that those democratic forms are the source of their deprivation and may turn
against those.
So I think we all recognize that democracy is a lot more fragile than maybe Professor
Rawls appreciated at the time he was writing it.
I mean, I think that we have to realize that when we let talk us first, because I think
his his feed delay kind of got him behind the behind the eight ball go ahead, talk us.
No, I'm fine.
I mean, let me see how how to how to how to work how populist works.
So what we have in the beginning that's the situation of nature.
We have a liberal democracy.
What's a liberal democracy, right?
A liberal democracy is a system that acknowledges that there are many divisions in society, class
divisions, cultural divisions.
So again, I'm trying to link the dots, but regional divisions, religious divisions, you
name it, right?
Now, Rawls comes and says, Hey, guys, let us play moderately.
Let us know what he calls over overlapping consensus.
He uses this phrase overlapping consensus.
How do we do that by applying the rule of law and protecting the rights of minorities?
Now this is liberal democracy.
This is what we have.
Now a guy comes.
Okay.
And he says, because it is always a he, by the way, but I don't want to get into that.
He says, no, no, no, no, no, no, democracy.
I mean, our societies are not divided by so many divisions.
We have one one over our division, the people versus the elites.
Therefore we cannot build bridges.
There will be polarization.
Forget it.
Yes, adversity conflict.
We have to fight against each other.
Who's going to win?
We?
Why?
Because we are the majority.
We are the people.
Okay.
Forget rule of law, forget the protection of minority rights, et cetera, et cetera.
And this is how you get wrong.
And this is how I just said I disagree with that.
Five million.
Forters.
You have to realize that we are social movements that have that communicate our society all
the time.
I mean, Rawls is describing an idealized.
He's a political theorist.
He's a normative political theorist.
He's not a sociologist.
You can't wear political empirical social scientists.
You can't convert Rawls's idea into a empirical description of how democracy actually works
in an actual society.
So you can't criticize an actually existing society from the point of view of Rawls and
say it doesn't work right.
No.
It, in se we have to think about how does it work?
And I think it's fascinating to me that despite the most radical right-wing challenge in American
history, which was Trump, because he took the presidency, the structural difference
in the administration of the United States, the set of office obligations of many office
holders, the legal order, other civil associations, and the institution of journalism as a profession,
it contained this very dangerous populist movement.
And so we can't just broadly talk about populism taking over countries.
We have to think of them as movements.
And we need to think of institutions and other kinds of virtues.
I think it's sort of a populism as a stress test, I think, is an interesting way of thinking
about it.
Insofar as it's not just individuals who are singled out as the bad elites, but actually
institutions like the media, like universities, I mean, I would say the United States has
passed a stress test a lot better than Hungary currently is, given the state of civil society
institutions there.
And that might have to do with the particular forms of decentralization of power that are
possible.
And power thought of very broadly, not just as political power, but also as economic,
cultural power.
How many people know each other in certain kinds of political circles?
And can a political party take over a media apparatus or not?
Those kinds of things depend on networks of affinity that are much harder to pull off
in a country of 330 million people.
Oh, no, I don't think that's exactly true.
I mean, we have big countries like Brazil and Turkey.
I think if you have a democracy for 200 years and you have a gradual institutionalization
of professions, I mean, most of the weak, the illiberal democracies, including Greece,
including Poland, including Hungary, including Brazil, are very recently established.
They have very, very fragile.
Look in the liberal democracy.
No, it's not, but it has a very unstable democracy.
It has had in the past your references to the right.
I mean, it's a great democracy is very stable.
I'm sorry.
I mean, we didn't say now.
I didn't say now.
It is almost 50 years in the scheme of things.
That's not very wrong.
I'm sorry.
I mean, I'm glad that that's fine.
That's fine.
No problem.
No problem.
I don't take that personally.
Don't worry.
But, you know, democracies, right.
I mean, the thing is that when a populist party comes into power and this has happened
in Greece, as I said earlier, I mean, I've lived through this.
I mean, this is the story of my life as a matter of fact.
They stop the weakening situations and then another populist may come down the road and
then another one and then you do not know what will happen to your democracy.
And this is what happened in the Republican room, by the way, after Tiberius Gracus, we
mentioned earlier that 60 years down the road, another guy came that's in a gun called
Marius and another one called Silla and then Bruce's and then the Republic was gone.
This is what we get.
I mean, I cannot see how Hungary, for example, Poland can go back to even weak liberalism.
Yes, those are weak liberal democracies, but liberal have been in the past.
This is what I'm saying.
And Greece might go down that same road again.
I know what you mean.
I mean, I didn't mean to disagree with you, but democracy has been stable in Greece for
a number of years, but the institutions are not that strong.
Yes, I know what you mean.
So I don't disagree with you at all.
But it is exactly those feeble institutions that charismatic leader because there is
charisma there and there is agency.
They may win power over and over again and lead those democracies to some authoritarian
direction.
That is the fear.
So this populism is a deep tendency in, I would say, all societies and it's counteracted by
what?
By deeply structured autonomous institutions committed to certain virtues that are run
that are deeply professionalized by strong civic traditions.
But that won't stop the populist impulse, right?
And the populist impulse can be very productive if you have these institutions.
It can lead to reforms like the working man's movement in the 19th century or socialism
being transformed into social democracy and the big welfare state in Western Europe.
And these are very positive developments, but then you can have something like the peasant
movements in China and the workers and peasants movement in Russia that end up creating dictatorships
that last for a long, long, long time.
They don't have populism, right?
They don't have populism.
One point I want to make and I challenge here is that I do not know in the modern world
again any case in which anywhere in the liberal world, meaning the Americas, Europe, Canada,
Australia, etc., Japan, any case in which populism has had positive outcomes that populism has
been positive after being in power.
Olivia?
Well, I honestly think that's one of the advantages of his talk with perspective because it gives
you a lot more examples of populist movements that have been very beneficial.
And I think the working men's party in the United States is a good example.
I think the People's Party in the 1890s was a good example.
I think we can all think of revolutionary movements that looked maybe pretty awful and close,
but had beneficial results over a longer degree.
So let me put in a plug for historical examples and a historical perspective because I think
that gives us a much more complicated nuanced view of what the possibilities are.
What would you be aware of?
I think I focused on modern populations.
Yeah.
Would there be a way to distinguish?
I know this is not likely, but good populist movements.
What is that may be in a good populist movement that leads to reform versus one that seems
to be what we use the words divisive, polarizing, et cetera?
I don't think polarization is necessarily bad.
I mean, right, I think-
Polarization.
The fracturing of civil society is bad.
And maybe that's a characteristic effect of long-term polarization.
But if we think about corruption as obviously one phenomenon we can identify, it's possible
for a mass movement to demand more accountability from political actors and economic actors for
that matter that reduces corruption.
And that's something that's quite measurable.
And I would say that that's one phenomenon.
Another- The reason I brought up Bolivia is that inequality has gone down.
And of course, there- Under Morales, who has obviously had authoritarian tendencies, which
we should think are bad, to maintain power and to self-aggrandize in certain ways.
But infrastructure spending is massively up.
The welfare of people in rural poverty is massively up in Bolivia over that time frame.
And you might think that's a happy accident of the resource extraction economy and market
prices and so on.
There's disagreement to be had.
But one interpretation of those events is that that was a situation in which- This is
especially a problem in petrostates or resource-dependent states that that money gets tied up in the
hands of a handful of people and does not get used to bring people out of poverty.
Of course, Norway is a petrostate too, and they seem to do a pretty good job of taking
care of people there.
And you can see how resource extraction can be to the benefit of a welfare state and to
the welfare of the worst-off people.
And I think there are different trajectories that a populist movement can take.
And I think Venezuela versus Bolivia is an interesting contrast because of the relatively
similar time frames.
I mean, Bolivia is a very unusual movement of a very unusual example of left populism.
Radical.
I mean, radical left populism staying within the tracks barely of democracy and the recent
elections, a great example of a populist being elected again after an interim liberal.
But I mean, what I'd like to ask the panel, like, what about the surging of black people's
movements in the United States from the 1960s?
That's a social movement, and they call themselves the people acting on behalf of the people.
I mean, they have charismatic leaders.
How do you fit that in?
I mean, there's this tendency to look at the issue as elites dominating or populism.
But there's very positive social movements starting with the socialist or working people's
movements in the 19th century that have...
So what do you deal with the mass movement against racial oppression?
And how do you classify that in these terms?
Mass movements are part of, you know, they fit very well in the framework of a liberal
democracy.
I mean, those mass movements have two flurries.
They may flurries.
They may have their leaders as long and they may act and produce their results as long as
they abide by the rules of liberal democracy by the institutions.
There's nothing problematic about those movements.
I mean, by the way, let me say that Bolivia, Bolivia is not a good example, because Bolivia
is the only country in Latin America in which you have the majority of the population is
in the US.
So if you don't take the ratio issue, you cannot make sense of Bolivia, and you cannot compare
Bolivia to any other country in Latin America and the world, actually, because...
And this is what Morales was an individual, right?
So here, we support of his people, essentially, and he became president of Bolivia, and then
the end was not very happy.
It was a very unhappy end, but that was...
I mean, Bolivia is not comparable because of the racial composition of the country.
So let us leave Bolivia out.
It's a bad case.
It sounds like it's a case that doesn't fit your priors, and that's why it's a bad case.
I think it's a very interesting and illuminating...
It doesn't fit in the others.
But anyway, I want to respond to the question about...
I think I examined...
I mean, I think I answered by, you know, data.
I mean, I'm giving you data, and there is something that distinguishes Bolivia, and this is race.
Well, let me talk about race in America for a moment.
So I think...
I'm a compartment.
I think the 1963 March on Washington is a fantastic example of what the civil rights
movement accomplished and what it didn't.
This is the March on Washington for jobs and freedom, and in the writing of American history,
the jobs part has dropped out.
The minimum wage that is being debated in our country now is roughly corresponds to
the minimum wage that was one of the main demands of that march, a $2 minimum wage in
1963, which works out to something like $15 or $16 I think today.
And it didn't get passed.
And in general, you know, people remember the... I have a dream and the content of the
character and things like that.
And that's been written into sort of American history, but not the economic demands.
And I think the profound failures of the labor movement, both through internal fracturing
and through external pressures and the failure of the kind of regulatory apparatus in the
government side, that is one of the reasons for the continued massive gap in wealth between
black Americans and other Americans.
And one way of looking at that is that the civil rights movement was a beginning, obviously
guaranteeing civil rights in legislation and constitutions is crucial.
But it was seen as only one piece of a larger platform of changes to the material benefit
of black people that have largely not been realized in the country.
And I think from that perspective, that I think is a huge stain.
And I think there will be... There's a continued opportunity on that front for multiracial
coalitions of people within the labor movement and in other venues in America.
And I think there will be a kind of resurgence of economic populism along those lines before
too long because it looks like the basically center left and center right policies of the
democratic and republican parties are not sufficient to address those kinds of problems.
But what I was really asking is whether the black movements in the 20th century have...
Don't they have many of the elements of populism, not whether they're incompatible with liberal
democracy?
No, no, I think they absolutely did.
And I think their economic dimensions are underplayed.
So that's what I was suggesting is that actually seeing them as a... Seeing that movement as
an economic populist movement is really essential to understanding what it was.
Yeah, exactly.
And they also critique the white even if you take the non-economic dimensions.
They were a movement and are a movement against an elite.
They called the white elite.
And just as the women's movement is... Has been very, very anti-black male elites.
It's been a mass movement of attack on male power.
I mean, the Me Too movement.
These are massive uprisings of people in a quote unquote class that I regard as a part
of this populist impulse that nobody would call them populist though.
Because they like them too much or many of the elites like them too much.
Harry?
Well, I would say there, if I could interject just a moment, I think the women's movement
or the civil rights movement are good examples of movements with populist features.
But the race-based civil rights movement cannot claim in the United States to represent the
whole people because African Americans are what?
20% of the population, 11% of the population in some counts.
We've seen in recent years coalition building efforts.
So now you hear about black and brown people or broader or black Latins and indigenous.
And so there's coalition building.
But nevertheless, the civil rights movement doesn't claim to represent the whole people.
But it, Jeffery's absolutely right there, it has very strong populist features.
Women's movement, the same way the women's movement can represent half the people, but
not the whole people.
So this I think is one of the benefits of fuzzy categories is you can say, look at the populist
features of civil rights, look at the populist features of anti-sexism and make those kind
of productive comparisons without getting hung up on just exactly how well they fit your
prayer definition.
Are these movements we're describing now, the degree they partake of populism as a driving
force, do they succeed to the degree that they also partake of some, they moderate this
radical part of it.
I think MLK is a good example of someone who sort of promised to white folks that he was
not a radical.
And I think to some degree that was helpful, I think abolitionists also a century earlier
tried to make the case or win over the hearts of the rest of the country as a way to sort
of spear, and some of them of course were quite radical, but is that the case that this sort
of moderating their radical?
I wouldn't go to the radicalism effort, but I would say that populist movements, like
minority populist movements, if we can use that expression, succeed to the degree to
which they can build a majority coalition by persuading people outside their base that
hey, I think that's just, or I can see how our people would benefit from that also.
So the degree to which they can build coalitions for radical measures or radical measures,
but the point is that they can move towards a majority in a democratic framework.
Yeah, I mean, I mean, I think that's a good point.
I mean, the idea of a civil sphere or a republic has the idea that there's a vital center.
And if a populist movement moves too far to the right or the left, it says, I don't care.
Nope.
I think we have.
We will.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
Who else wants to jump in?
I mean, I want to endorse that point.
I think the kind of stability of movement depends on coalition building in important
ways, and this is one of the puzzles is that yes, you set yourself up against the elite
and you might complain about the domination of certain kinds of institutions by the elite.
But do you want to get rid of the institutions themselves or do you want to innovate them
so fully that they can't function?
That's the point of which I think this starts to become sort of consumptive of the civil
sphere, the republican spheres.
I think Jeff was saying.
Jeff, I think you're freed up.
You want to finish your thought?
I'm not sure where I was cut off.
It's hard to finish it when I didn't know where I was.
I was saying that, I mean, if a movement on the right or the left moves away and says
I give up on the Bible center, I'm going to establish a power simply on behalf of my
own movement.
So in that sense, black power in terms of black panther, that was a populism.
They spoke to the people all the time by the way.
And Trump, as to the good point that Harry Mann, I mean, Trump spoke on behalf of the
people all the time, but we know it was on behalf of only white people.
His people, especially white people, and he left out.
So this tension is always there, of course.
Let me go back to social movements, if I may.
When I went to school, we called them movements and the whole field was called consensus politics.
So there was, by the eighties, nineies, et cetera, the whole gamut emerged around the
time and they were asking power, essentially.
And the most important of those movements was the Green movement, of course.
They created lots of parties in Europe, some of the parties formed coalition governments,
some of those are in power even today in a number of countries.
Now, those movements are the gist and the essence of liberal democracy.
We need those those movements because they do not go against the constitution.
They want to change how politics works.
They bring in new issues.
Why do we call them populist?
The world populist did not exist back then.
I mean, we knew that Peron was populist, but no one understood what the terror meant.
So those movements are always there.
A very sensual part of democracy.
They did not popularly speak for particular electrics, constituencies.
And that's not.
What about the sort of...
What about the...
Making some claims.
Let me...
Yep.
I was going to say, what about laying some claim to a particular kind of virtue?
Some particular sort of virtue based on their who they are as a people.
That is a component of this.
These movements.
They are not there as people.
They are there as carriers of particular interests.
They want all goals.
Political goals.
They want a better climate, a green development, feminist movement, for example.
I mean, they want to pursue the interests and the rights of the feminist movement, for
example.
And then let me ask something, the whole panel, because this is a very interesting question.
I mean, this is one of the elephants, a number of elephants, when it comes to populism.
What do we mean when we say the people?
I mean, do we mean the nation, like, you know, make America great again?
Do we mean the underprivileged?
Straight up?
All over the place?
The poorer people, the ordinary people?
Do we mean the working class, in which case where the Marxist domain, for example?
Do we mean race?
Like in Bolivia?
Do we mean...
Stay in English?
Like in India?
For example, who are the people in India?
Define the people?
Well, according to Modi, it's Hindus.
But there is an open question.
Right?
I mean, it's pretty straightforward in some case, what the relevant form of populism
is trading on.
I mean, changing the laws on citizenship is a pretty clear move to define the people.
If you want to look at a concrete political action, you know, the 2009-19 Citizenship Act,
you know, to make it impossible for large numbers of Muslims living in India to remain
or become citizens, you know, that kind of religious test is a pretty clear, you know,
attempt to define the boundaries.
So what do you say in the United States?
The people that don't exist, the people that don't exist, the people that don't exist,
the people that are made, yep, it is a construction.
Right?
I mean, Buddha talked about that, I mean, the making of the class.
So you have a populist leader who makes his own people, and then he has his own clients
for going to vote for him, and he's going to stay there in power forever.
And that's that.
Enjoy.
It's a function of language to a degree, to label some group.
And it's interesting now, and I wanted to open up the conversation to incorporate information,
the flow of information.
We talked about, you know, the free press and how that's important.
And it's attacked by populist leaders, demagogues anyway, is often a part of their game plan.
You know, labeling any group with any label, elite people, you know, is a language game
in a way, right?
But I wonder how much you all think information, how it flows and who controls it has an effect
on populism.
I mean, I think this is one of the differences in modern populist movements is now the attempt
to bypass traditional media and use social media.
You know, that's one way of kind of doing an end run.
I think that's been proven to be pretty successful worldwide in various cases.
I mean, I'll move this to pandemic on filtering the reality for the people in the movement
so that it recapitulates the tenets of the movement.
But every social movement for the last 200 years has always had its own misfampers, its
own, you know, you didn't need social media to have Hitler, right?
And yet grasping a new form of communication has been effective for populist movements
and not just in our lifetimes in an early Republican society where communication was
based on drawing room conversation.
It suddenly introduced mass circulation newspapers and political rallies with hundreds of people.
That's a new form of political communication and it can be very effective.
Even populist are very innovative in their political techniques and seizing new forms
of political communication can be, you know, part of the winning strategy.
Well, but Obama was a campaigner and President introduced the digital revolution first.
Yeah, and you can see how, you know, you can have these features of populism without maybe
being a full-throated populist.
And of course populist leaders are very good at learning, you know, these kinds of techniques
and adapting them and it takes time.
And I think, you know, the common thread is a kind of attempted direct communication
unmediated by the kinds of traditional institutional actors.
So instead of, you know, primary politics in America have changed dramatically in the
last 25 years.
It used to be that, you know, it was a very, is a hyper-local sort of phenomenon and you
had to have the kind of grassroots organizing which meant that you had to get hold of people.
But going back to Howard Dean up to the present, you know, the internet has really changed
that.
The flow of money has changed.
The flow of information has changed.
There's been a kind of nationalization of party primaries and that's really changed the
influence of political parties and their ability to keep certain kinds of radical people out
of, you know, presidential primaries in the US.
And I think that's a fascinating change.
And lots of people are learning that lesson all across the political spectrum, sort of
all at once.
I would put that in a broader perspective because it is not only the type of the medium, the
type of the, how do they try to reach larger audiences and what do they do, the technique.
It is that obviously this, when they come into power, they try to silence the practice
that opposes the rule.
So I would put that in the broader framework of institutions because what we see, we put
the playbook there, the populist playbook, is that when they take power, they attack
the institutions, all of them, press is one of them, freedom of the press.
They attack the judiciary.
They go against the courts.
We saw that in America.
We saw that in all other cases, populist rule.
They try to violate the division of powers.
They try to control education.
So they meditate against institutions of liberal democracy, hence my definition of democratic
liberalism.
Okay.
And this is very typical.
I mean, there is not any case of populist rule that I happen to know that you do not
see the same moves over and over again.
It's like a playbook.
I think the exact same thing.
I think the fact that we know there are actors, China, Russia in particular, who have made
an effort to redirect the conversation on or the ideas flowing through social media,
that that's an important aspect of what we're seeing in modern modern times.
These are not the most important questions though.
I think we can sign them.
China, no questions.
Yeah, are the democracies.
Say that again.
I'm sorry.
Repeat that.
Talk to us.
You repeat that.
Okay.
For some reason, I think he's sorry.
Yeah, I didn't say anything.
Okay.
All right.
So the ideas we will open up some of the questions that have come from the audience.
And Alex is here to help guide us through that.
Yeah.
So if anyone wants to write more, because only I only have one question so far, I guess
too, from Susanna Black through the Zoom.
So if anyone has any questions, please write it in the Q&A part or on the chat and I'll
relay it.
But yeah.
So Susanna Black wrote something, I guess, based on what sort of Jeffrey had asked, which
was, are contemporary race and sex-focused progressive movements populist or anti-pop
list?
Can you speak to distinction between class-based left populism of the 2016 Bernie type and
contemporary progressive politics, which tend to center issues other than in class and
may tend in certain cases to reinforce existing institutional power, i.e. the phenomenon of
will capitalism, and then they wrote, alternatively, how can we do a better job in creating a
common good politics that speaks to and includes all people in a polity as opposed to ontologizing
the division or antagonism between the people and the elites?
Is that possible or desirable?
I mean, one thing that I was saying earlier, I think, in response to that, which is that
there's different kinds of different forms of pluralist politics.
And one of them is sort of concerned with, say, the rectification of historical or present
injustices and attempts to point to places where people cannot meet on an even footing
in the public sphere as is desired by the principles of Republican politics.
And I think we don't have a lot of talk about our Republican form of government anymore.
We spend very little time, you know, there's attention as paid to the eroding of our institutions
or to certain kind of issues about dark money in our politics and so on.
We don't talk very much about things like, well, citizens need certain kinds of virtues
for our system of government to survive, the very things that you can see littered all
over the federalist papers, as I mentioned at the beginning.
And I think one result of that is that we get a kind of empty pluralist politics, which
says not taking into account whether people are subject to any form of injustice or meeting
each other and even playing field, that certain kinds of identities are more important than
one's identity as a citizen and need to be sort of celebrated or valued in certain ways.
And to some extent, this is a kind of, this is fine because it might be pushing back against
a homogenizing impulse that's also inappropriate to a large plural society.
But unless it's framed with a certain set of aspirations about what we want to do together
in civil society, my fear is that it tends to be more, you know, to contribute to certain
kinds of fracturing that make it impossible to have broad coalition-based politics of
a kind that, you know, is in defense of our common life.
So that's sort of my concern about what I call pluralism without aspiration or empty
pluralism that I think maybe certain strands of progressive politics point in this direction,
not all of them.
And I think it's very easy to sort of paint different political movements and dismiss
them.
And I don't mean to be doing that, but that's a sort of reservation that I have.
I really like to endorse that, Jay, because you mentioned the Federalist Papers and the
invocation of virtue over and over again in the Federalist Papers, going past that word
virtue to think about what people in that era meant by the word virtue.
When you were talking about public life, they meant virtue to them was the ability to set
aside narrow personal self-interest and to advocate for the common good, however that
might be defined.
And the pitfall there was that every pluralistic group tended to define the common good as
their good, and it sort of collapsed into brokerage liberalism.
But if there were a way for us to recapture a vision of the common good or to advocate
for a vision of the common good that would embrace more than relatively small, certainly
minority-sized slices of the population, then I think we'd be taking a step in the right
direction.
One of the problems is that the word virtue was so hokey these days that anybody who stands
up and tries to advocate for it kind of gets wet.
I guess we're supposed to say good character now or something like that.
There's something like that.
I mean, I disagree with both of you guys.
I think that virtues are completely at the heart of all most of our public discourse
today, and that the idea that we need to go back to an earlier smaller form of republicanism
based on the Greeks or the founding fathers, it's not right because virtues still are here.
For example, when people say Trump was selfish and he only cared about himself, and then his
opponents argued we need somebody who cares about the whole society.
Just as virtue talk, when somebody says people are dishonest, when they say they're corrupt,
when they say that they're irrational or insane, that they don't have common sense, this concern
with virtue permeates left, right, and center in all these democracies.
I don't think that the way to get a good society is to say that we need a new set of virtues.
I think that in fact there's an ideal of a good society in back of left, right, and center
except for the extremes, and that that ideal is going to be incorporated in a partisan way
through ideology.
You will never have us all sharing this whole thing, but we'll have us talking about it
all the time.
I want to push back on that because I think a lot of the, if you look at the polling,
people thought that Trump was not a very honest or a public minded person when they voted
for him, and that's the scandal, right?
The thought is, and it doesn't have to be Trump in particular, you can apply it to whoever
else you like, the idea is that virtue should be a criterion for high office, and it should
also be what we try to promote in society rather than factional interest rather than
monetary benefit.
This is true of technocratic liberals on the left as well as the right that they want
to measure the flourishing of the society based on how much money is in your pocketbook
or how good you feel about things rather than character.
I think that is the part of the Republican ideal that is lacking.
Not leaving—all of our moral talk is virtue talk, of course.
I agree with that.
Yes.
And Trump, you're taking a poll that says, polls are impossible to use as ways of judging
how people think of leaders, but I'm sure that people thought that Trump, his supporters,
that he has the virtue of telling the truth.
And truthfulness is a virtue.
It's an important virtue.
But isn't virtue or pretend virtue what essentially ends up creating the groups?
Yeah, I mean, but the thing is we can't try to find what's the true virtue.
I mean, not if we stand back and look at the discourse of a complex pluralistic society.
Every group will claim that it has the right virtue.
Right, but that's what creates the group.
Yeah, I agree totally.
It is.
But I think that's also what creates the aggression between the groups because I think
my virtue is better than your virtue and therefore you are wrong and so I can attack you.
Yes.
But if you want to see what is an operational definition of a better society, to me as a
more incorporated one that allows more people the use of their full life forces.
And I think that that's really what Trump, the right populace, are a reaction against
the expansion of the civil sphere in the United States.
And so Susan, I wouldn't be so depressed about this.
I don't, I think that these movements are reactions against progress that we may be in
store for another few years of a progressive movement.
Not a populist one.
May I take a different approach perhaps?
I like this discussion about virtue.
Of course, we need that.
We need tons of that.
But thinking about our lives and about the future and about what we're going to do in
future, let's see what are the problems first of all.
I mean, what are the problems we face as humanity, public health, pandemic, next epidemic, the
other one, the third one, that's it.
I mean, my graduation and multiculturalist, fourth, I think, I mean, what do we do?
I mean, with an ethos who happened to live in the same neighborhood.
And finally, the survival of democracy.
It is not evident that our democracies will survive forever.
Now, my question is this.
I will make two points actually.
First, I think that in all of those things, technocracy, technology is very crucial in
all of those things.
And I think that populists are very much inimical to the technology and the technocracy.
It is the elite after all, okay?
We don't like the elites because we're populists, but it so happens.
But among the elites, most of the technocrats from bigade to the universities where all
of you teach in the United States, you are very fond of technocracy and technology and
populists don't like that.
So we have to do something about it.
So populists do not play a positive role.
And my second point is that populists do not solve any of those big problems.
Apparently, accept or theoretically accept inequality.
But do they have the means?
Do they have the policies?
Do they have the agenda to solve socio-economic inequality?
No.
So I will leave it here by saying that liberal democracy is the only and better solution
that we have and we have to improve the institutions of our liberal democracies.
And this is the stance I will take in this discussion.
Maybe the panelists could respond to the Fishline question that's on the Q&A.
Yeah, yeah.
I'll read it out for you.
So the first one, Scott wrote, thank you, Scott, for writing these questions.
The first one he wrote was, what do the panelists think about the idea of popular and communitarian
thought and again after Trump that the rise of right-wing populists movements in the
United States is a result of a hollowing out of America's civil society and engagement
in local politics is a big part of left and right-wing populism, some sort of illusion
of national engagement in politics that replaces the vital role of engagement in community life
in societies.
We'll talk about a second question.
And then the second one, excuse me, it seems that all right-wing populism is immediately
labeled fascism by the left media and all left-wing populism is immediately labeled socialism
by the right-wing media.
And that ultimately this prevents any real engagement for the country with the very real
problems that generate these movements and give demagogues like Trump a platform.
How can we engage with people's outrage in a more constructive way than populism or labeling
people's grievances as politically radical and therefore invalid?
And I think I'll just say briefly, I really like that second point.
It's very, it's really fascinating and important which is that populism tends to be a label
of denigration often used to undermine the valid dimension of massive social movements.
We are right to be very worried about the anti-democratic dimensions as Tarkis has talked
about throughout.
At the same time, I think we want to respond to Trumpism by saying it reveals as Don and
Jay's talk about the underlying displacement of masses of Americans economically.
So I think that's a good point that populism is a label that is right to use in a sense
to pollute the anti-democratic and demagogu-d aspect but yet usually populism responds to
deep fractures that need to be repaired in a society.
I mean, I think one thing we can think about is sort of what is government for and what
are the limits of what government can achieve and what are political movements for.
And when I think about economic issues or issues of distributive justice or even issues
of access to certain kinds of institutions, those seem like places where government can
do something and ought to do something.
But if the grievances are related to there are too many brown people in my neighborhood,
I don't think that's something that government should be in the business of doing quite the
opposite.
So politics of grievance can be politics of legitimate grievance or illegitimate grievance
and we have to hold the line on we have a multicultural, plural society.
I'm an immigrant, a legal immigrant and a naturalized citizen of this country and I've
also immigrated to other countries.
I spent some years living in the UK and I think that's been central to the kind of American
experiment in American national ideology and politicians of all strikes should agree with
that.
But we can also say that these kinds of grievance politics are exacerbated by certain kinds of
economic phenomena and you don't have to respond directly to people's feelings but you can
respond to what their feelings might be driven by if you think that's a legitimate side for
government intervention in a problem of distributive justice or a problem of equality and rights.
And again, not to sort of jump on the Republican hobby horse too much but solidarity is also
a word that's kind of dropped out of our politics.
The fraternity element of our Republican imagination and I think there ought to be a bigger space
for solidarity, not just solidarity among say the working class or anything like that but
solidarity across class divisions, across racial divisions and this is really central
and needs to be restored to our politics too.
And so far as we think of populism as a bad thing, I think part of the appropriate response
also has to be building a culture of solidarity.
Well I would say that populism can be redeemed if you will, it is not always bad.
If it embraces a coalition building ethos that says let's reach out to other aggrieved
people who don't look exactly like us and let's build a movement, then populism can
be a very good thing.
I guess so far as to say that populism created liberal democracy from the 18th century forward.
It's not automatically an opposite force that we have to choose either or instead we need
desperately to have a populist element in liberal democracy and we needed to have a coalition
building ethos to it.
That's how you get things done in a majority based political system.
And I mean what about going back to talk at this first point about illiberal democracy
being a definition in that there are certain virtues associated with illiberalism, they're
actually what they call with these folks who promote it, call their virtues and it's interesting
to think well what are those and how might we neutralize them or engage them in a way
that's more constructive.
Can you be more specific about the virtues of illiberal democracy?
Well let's see, one comes to mind.
If the elites are overly educated in their egg heads they don't really know how the plain
folk what they experience, what they do, there's this virtue which is we don't listen to experts.
In fact listening to experts is considered a negative virtue.
So that would be an example of what I mean.
Also I think that there's such a thing as impartiality or that anyone might strive towards impartiality.
I made this comment several times that Trump made a comment about their Republican judges
and their Democratic judges and Justice Roberts said no no they're not and Trump said well
of course they are you're being a chump and I know.
He was going to speak the truth on that occasion of course.
We have a lifetime appointment super legislature that runs large parts of our public life.
Of course we do.
Every single political scientist would tell you that.
But wait wait okay but yes if people want to write and if people left both seem to endorse
that claim of Trump's which I would say is unfortunate in this sense that it's not prescriptive
of the Democratic spirit.
Because judges do think they're being impartial and we have ways of discerning people who
tend to be impartial were deliberative in their judgments and people who are not and
I think everyone can recognize that or usually can and it's an important virtue that I don't
hear from it very much and not to use a clang term.
But just on the point of intention of impartiality I mean one issue we haven't spoken about is
nationalism versus cosmopolitanism.
That's a different version of it but it's complementary to what you're saying and illiberal
politics are usually highly nationalistic and explicitly anti-conson-polliton which they
associate cosmopolitanism with intellectuals choose and other people like bankers etc.
Just can I give a Jerry's point about expertise because I think this is really interesting.
I mean I think listening to experts you framed it very carefully listening to experts is
a good thing we might think because there are problems that arise in complex political
societies that require expertise to address them.
But rule by experts is bad anti-democratic and inappropriate.
And there's a strain of anti-democracy on the technocratic left just as there is on
the kind of hyper-nationalist or hyper-populist right which wants to exclude people from voter
rolls and things like that.
And one way of being anti-democratic is being technocratic, two technocratic and saying
I think a great example of this is in the current pandemic we've had this kind of polarized
response to public health guidance that either wants to say well public health experts are
the right people to make these political decisions on our behalf and Anthony Fauci should decide
whether we should shut down or not which fails to recognize that there are lots of goals,
political goals that we have in a public health crisis that have to be balanced against each
other.
And I think this comes out most clearly in the conversation about school closures.
Even after it's been, it seems like schools can be reopened pretty safely, it's become
a kind of principle in certain corners of the left in our current political system to say
no the schools have to stay shut which ignores the massive inequality that is drive as when
you think about the radically higher effects of school closures on poorer and minority
children.
And so I think just realizing that there is no such thing as political expertise that
there is only political wisdom which is to say there is a sense of the different kinds
of goals that we are trying to pursue on behalf of all of us.
And we have an sort of imperfect people who are sufficiently different from each other
who are going to deliberate and figure this out but they are not experts in anything.
They should listen to experts and so far as expert knowledge is relevant and available.
And of course saying you never listen to experts is just as foolish as saying always
listen to experts.
But I think there is a deeper truth that is not a nonpartisan truth about the nature of
politics that we can get to here just by careful reflection on what it is that we are doing
when we are deliberating together.
I think one of the things that gives expertise a bad name is that experts claim their authority
on universal characteristics they would say we know the scientific truth and that is good
for everybody and we sort of insist that it go down.
When in fact they are advocating a set of policies that benefit a very narrow slice of
the population.
So when experts claim to be to have universal validity but actually are being very selfish
then that is a perfect ticket for getting discredited on the populist level.
So I think one of the reasons, one of the things that sets off populist movements is
that the elites really have failed for people.
And that means that if information based elites that is experts want to retain the
respect of the public and they have to kind of keep doing a gut check about whether their
advice is truly beneficial for people at large or only a fraction.
Well last century in his public opinion Walter Lippmann had written about the use of stereotypes
as a potent force in driving public opinion how much they repressed ideas as much as they
put forward ideas which is an interestingly psychoanalytic way of looking at stereotypes.
But I would say that the issue about let's say experts and expertise is that in this information
marketplace some of these stereotypes end up acting as tokens and the sort of subtleties
that you just both of you just expressed about expertise which is wonderful and should be
out there ends up being repressed pushed away because of the effect of these stereotypes.
Okay, how many questions are we feeling sorry just because there's one on YouTube and I
have one myself but I don't want to abuse my position as a Q&A moderator.
So if that's cautious so there's one on YouTube and then I could give mine if that's okay
with all of you otherwise I'll just do the one on YouTube.
No no you can do that too.
Okay, okay.
You're both.
Okay so the one on YouTube is from Robert Price thank you Robert.
So Robert wrote what is the balance between identity versus issue or virtue with regard
to intensity of emotions?
Are different orders of passion generated by identity and issues or virtues?
I mean just I just like to say that a lot of can be popular.
Let me let me try.
Wait hold on Taka's we got a little delay here but Jeff why don't you go first then we'll
take you talk to us.
I think that's a good question because a lot of the fear of populism is the fear of emotions
in politics as endangering supposedly the virtue of deliberative rationality and I don't
agree with that I think that sociologically mass movements are emotional and in that sense
they all engage in stereotypes they engage in in passion and non rational behavior that
gives them if you want to start from every the center yes it gives them a dimension of
populism but it doesn't make an anti-democratic.
Taka's?
Well more or less what Jeffrey said but from a slightly different perspective I do not
understand why mass movements are emotional I think they are rational to a very large
extent but let us not argue about that.
I think that again going trying to answer both questions I was listening to you earlier
guys I mean talking about perhaps populists might be a good thing and populists created
liberallies meant you know to take to technocracy and I was thinking from my little place in
Europe because I'm in Europe that if I remember well you had an election a few months ago
in the United States and the whole society became very much polarized about those issues
we are all of the motions we are all of technology what do we do with you know COVID-19 how do
we face that and you know rationality technocracy etc etc so that did you forget about that
so populist was not a good thing and this is why the American people voted for you know
a different administration and non populist one because that was the issue I mean a liberallies
versus liberallies.
So the interesting thing here is that emotions versus rationality are populists it's always
about words about ethos about emotions about resentment resentment vindictiveness those
are crucial feelings behind the rise of populist movements on the other hand you have rationality
problem solving making positive some games not zero some games how to build positive some
games this is not the game of populist this is the game of liberallies okay so that is
the the thing that has a balance that has to be achieved in our societies I mean how much
emotion how much rationality what do we want how do we what do we prefer what do we choose
when you know the chips go down like now with COVID for example so that is you're describing
this is an enormous process for us to understand what they are.
Well it seems to me I don't know they go to get us forward sample of the importance of
a long term perspective because populism was part of the collapse of the Soviet Union populism
a represent was throughout the Arab Spring that didn't work out as well as it should have
but populism is part of the legacy of the American and French revolutions and that ultimately
strengthens liberal democracy populism can be an enormously liberating thing in the proper
context and so that's why I'd like to keep a window open to the the positive aspects of
populism because in the law in historical long run there it has been very important to my
way thank you anyway.
That is fully legitimate Harry I understand that of course but I don't forget that there
was a populist president in your country a few months ago.
Yes I think that's a perfect example I think the remarks you've made and the remarks I've
made are good examples of the way that populism has in effect a two-faced character it can
be beneficial and it can be very harmful and you know like like so many other things it
needs to be deployed properly.
Alex you want to go back fire away with your question?
Yeah so I kind of want to put the mirrors on to the populist leaders so what do you think
about this statement the populism that we see you especially amongst Trump and the other
leaders you mentioned is a reflection of the road in competence and sadism and incompetence
being even emotional and confidence and so I've heard references to Venezuela and then
some of Modi's failed policies in India like with the land reform and I think the demonetization
that was a complete catastrophe but I also thought of a funnier example I think it's
also rather telling is the MVP so the member of European Parliament from Hungary I can't
I don't want to pronounce his name because I'm not going to get it right but he wrote
the Constitution of Hungary that Hungary currently has on his iPad he made gay marriage illegal
and he was found in Belgium at a orgy amongst like 20 other men during the lockdown with
ecstasy on him and so he's like oh that's not mine but boy it's like you know that's
I the other reason I came up with this besides that funny story is that in Hayek Friedrich
Hayek's wrote the serfdom when he looks back on the collectivism amongst Naziism Italian
fascism and US sarcommism that you have these characters who really exact really brutal
like this brutalism amongst the people and you really sort of wonder what would these
people be doing if they didn't live in these societies in this way like would they have
this political power and then lastly to bring it more modern if you look at the distinction
in immigration policy between Trump and Obama they did similar things Obama deported I think
more people than Trump did and a lot of the pictures of kids and cages were also during
Obama I think Obama was better in general I'm not I'm just saying like what I guess yeah
so what line do we draw between like this incompetence and sadism seen amongst these
populist leaders versus I guess what we see with leaders that we're seeing are normal
or you know fit the mold that are not populist I mean I think there's definitely a dimension
to which some of these differences are about language about the kind of form of political
communication and I'm always very interested in what the actual material impact of people's
policies are rather than in the way they talk but you have to admit that you know the
way that politicians and leaders talk does have an effect on the limits of acceptable
discourse on the demonization of minorities in particular I mean I think I think especially
if you look at the corruption that has come hand in hand with with populist leaders all
over the map you know the kind of patronage politics or cronyism that you know those are
those are very material impacts that you can see like our contracts going to the friends
of this charismatic leader or not so that those kinds of very concrete authoritarian tendencies
I think are important to keep in mind in competence that's interesting I mean the tendency is
for populist leaders to come in from the outside but not always right Modi is a good example
he was sort of normal part of BJP politics for a very long time before he came to power
and it was only because he was stained from from the 2002 scandal in Gujarat the sectarian
violence there that he he had to wait his time before he could he could successfully
run for higher office and he did you know he was kind of forgiven by the elite in various
ways for his role in that and you know I think some of some of his trade policies and
international development policies and infrastructure policies have worked and some of them have
been disastrous but you know the I think the lasting legacy is not going to be sort of
the normal politics but rather the demonization of Muslims the reconstruction of India not
as a secular but as a Hindu country and if you think about Trump and his effect we have
a kind of nationalist strain a xenophobic strain in our politics that has not succeeded before
post-World War II I mean other people have had this strain you know think about Pat Buchanan
and various other people who have been sort of openly nationalistic but you can just sort
of say white nationalist things as a normal member of the Republican Party especially
at the local level and that scene is acceptable and that's a change from the top so I think
I think that's the kind of that's that's the worrisome legacy outlasting any of the
incompetence or the competence of particular economic or tax policy or whatever else you
got.
Okay.
Well, what do you mean by incompetence?
Can I?
Yeah well yeah because I yeah because even sort of saw this with because yeah just sorry
just to clarify because you know with the with the people who stormed the Michigan State
House and then even the people who stormed the Capitol building on June January 6th
there was this idea that they were larping like their live action role playing and so
this idea that they're enacting a fantasy and then in a way when people talk about even
Trump and some of the policies he did a lot of the time you're like what you know what
like why is he hiring these people who are obviously not good at their jobs like he's
not good at his job to pick competent people so that's what I meant by I guess incompetence
in that way and I guess even mentally or emotional incompetence would be with the with the you
know talking about the guy from Hungary obviously having maybe being closeted and then enacting
and then creating a constitution doesn't allow you know civil rights to gay and lesbian couples
so I guess that's it's yeah it's not the most concise definition of incompetence but that's
sort of what I just think words because I mean yeah I mean the Hungarian guy I mean this
happened here in my neighborhood by the way three weeks ago four weeks ago he was you
know he was a creep I mean he went to that boardy and he was caught and tried to escape
the police he was taken to the police station etc etc I mean that's that's that's okay he
was a hypocrite anyways I mean he's one of the students of all-bound in Budapest but
that's not the point the point is that police leaders when they come to power they have proven
their competence okay they're strong charismatic leaders in most of the cases they create from
scratch their own parties like Chavez like Orban himself by the way like the Ruscone or
they take over parties created by others like your Trump for example right or Perron he
created his own party Alberto Fichimor in Peru created his own party Rafael Correa in Ecuador
so those are important strong people with great you know blunt ideas about the future and they
apply radical policies now they may be confident in implementing their policies I don't disagree
with that of course but they are very charismatic leaders in all the cases there's not any case
of charismatic leaders if I know again in power that has not had previously a charismatic leader
so it is that's a fact yeah all right well I think we should as much as I'd like to hear this go on
this has been a wonderful conversation I would say it's incredible I think it's time to wrap up
I want to again thank our our participants for such a lively conversation and our audience too for
their their participation and their listening again we're going to be reconvening on what was
the date I gave you March 20th for the placebo roundtable and further information to follow in our
website thank you again gentlemen and have a great great day and good weekend thank you thank you very
much thanks everybody enjoyed it
you
