 you you you you Well, it being the noon hour here in New York City, I want to welcome everyone and wish you a either a good morning, good afternoon or good evening, depending on where you're viewing the Zoom roundtable. This is I think our third Helix Center roundtable that we've, for which we've relied on the Zoom format. And of course that's due to the COVID pandemic. We're trying to do the best we can and make the best of it. I think so far these Zoom meetings have been quite lively and interesting. So before I tell you about today's roundtable, I want to make just two very brief announcements and those relate to our upcoming roundtables. Scheduled for March 20th, we will have a roundtable on placebo and the placebo and no-cibo effects. That should be very interesting. And then either on April 17 or 24th to be determined, we're going to have a talk on stress. And right now we're not stressing out about which data is exactly, but we should be able to have that nailed down shortly. Today we have a really wonderful panel of discussants and being to discuss this topic of populism. And before I get things under way, I want to just say a word, a brief word about each of our discussants and in the interest of equity, I'm going to do this in alphabetical order. Jeffrey Alexander is the Lillian Shavinson Satan Professor of Sociology at Yale University, founder and co-director of Yale's Center for Cultural Sociology and co-editor of the American Journal of Cultural Sociology. A social theorist whose early work challenged the anti-cultural reductionism of classical and modern sociology, Alexander has worked with generations of students and colleagues to create a quote strong program, unquote, in cultural sociology. Alexander has also developed the civil sphere theory, a macro sociological model of democracy and the forces that can undermine it. He is currently organizing a series of conferences and edited a book project, The Civil Sphere in Latin America, The Civil Sphere in East Asia, bridging the civil order radicalism in civil sphere. Don and Jay Jagannatham is a philosophy professor and also classical studies professor at Columbia University, is academic research centers on Aristotle's ethics and political philosophy and contemporary virtue ethics. He's also written about issues at the intersection of philosophy and literature, including on tragedy and the novel. At present, he is completing a book manuscript entitled Aristotle's Prejudge, which seeks to situate Aristotle's theory of practical wisdom within his views of knowledge and understanding and thereby to explain why Aristotle thinks a practical wisdom as an extraordinary achievement as equivalent to political wisdom. Taka's Pappas has a PhD from Yale in Political Science, he's a Greek author and researcher currently associated with the United States, and he's currently associated with the University of Helsinki and Finland. Formerly a professor of comparative politics at the University of Thessalonica in Greece, he's also held teaching and research appointments at the universities of Strasbourg, Oslo, Freiburg, Luxembourg, Central Europe University and Budapest, European University in Florence, Yale, and Princeton. Among his books are Making Democracy, Making Party Democracy in Greece, The Charismatic Party, and Populism and Crisis Politics in Greece. And lastly, Harry L. Watson is the Atlanta Distinguished Professor in Southern Culture in the History Department of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. A native of Greensboro, North Carolina, he received his bachelor degree from Brown University and his doctorate from Northwestern before joining the UNC History Department in 1976. His teaching and research interests focused on American political history, the Early American Republic, and the Antebellum South. He served as director of the UNC Center for the Study of American South from 1999 until 2012 and an editor of its journal, Southern Culture, from 1993 to 2019. He is the author or editor of eight books, including Andrew Jackson versus Henry Clay, Democracy in Development and Development in America, Liberty in Power, the Politics of Jacksonian America, and Building the American Republic, A Narrative History, to 1877. Okay, that they're with. I'm going to open up our conversation by asking each of our discussants to make some comments about how they define populism and I want to make it clear at the outset that I think everyone will agree that the term populism is not something that has an exact and precise definition, but is something that we all, at some point, seem to be wrapping our minds around, and then especially recently with the developments in our modern history, I think it's become a very hot topic. So I throw it open. Who wants to take a quick shot at just making a quick definition so we can get things underway? Well, I don't want to stick my neck out if I may, if everybody else is going to be shy. First of all, thank you very much for inviting me to participate. I look forward to this as being very interesting. It seems to me that you're very right to stress that populism is a fuzzy category, but it seems to me, almost always to refer to a mass movement, usually a mass political movement, but not always, of a large group of people who define themselves as simply the people, usually not subdivided further than that. They usually have agreements against elites whom they feel have deserved them and who are not too, who are there to serve the people, but have not. And the people are asked to replace, overthrow, displace these elites and govern more directly themselves. Sometimes the people also define themselves against a subordinate group, and they regard as also undeserving, and who perhaps are allies of elites who are working from both ends, as it were, against the people. Yeah, I think I can endorse quite a lot of that. What I want to add is I think something that distinguishes a lot of populist movements is that it's not just that they want to define a group of people as the people, but also that the people are kind of repository for certain kinds of qualities that are underappreciated by that elite that the people are defined in relation to. So I think coming from a kind of classical perspective, populist movements, you might say, appeal to the virtues that the masses possessed that are not commonly recognized and that it's a reaction to a construal of the people as lacking those virtues and deserving only secondary forms of political or social participation. I can go with that. Can we begin talking without? Yeah. So I will go next. And I beg to differ here because I do not believe that optimism is a fuzzy category, and I think that we can arrive at the exact and precise definitions of that. But before that, let me take a different approach here. My concern is when we talk about populism is why do we care about populism and why do we care about it now? And I think that there are, we're talking about modern populist here. Of course, there have been populist phenomenon history from, you know, from the Greek demagogues, for example, to the Roman Republic and all the way down to our own days, right? But we're talking about modern populist now. So what is very interesting about populism and about our concern about populism is that first it is a novelty. It is a new phenomenon that emerges in the aftermath of World War II in the liberal democracies that developed after the end of World War II. Secondly, it is a geographically diffused phenomenon. We see that firstly in Latin America, then it comes into Europe in the late 70s and then it expands to the United States. Thirdly, it is a very unbivalent phenomenon. We have left-wing populist and right-wing populist. And sometimes they come together very nicely and neatly like it happened in my country a few years ago. And finally, the fourth factor that makes populism such an intriguing phenomenon is that it has a strong impulse for autocracy. Although populist leaders come into power by the ballot box, it has a very, very strong impulse for autoritarians, for autocracy. We saw that in the United States quite recently. Now, all of those four factors lead us to a very, very simple definition. If we put them together and my definition has two words. It is the most minimal definition you can get around. There's nothing more minimal than that. So I define populism in my work. I've been here in this area for many, many years actually working on autolism and democracy, liberal democracy. So I define that as democratic liberalism. So it is a system, it is a political party or party. So for a system or a leader, if you like, any kind of level of unit of analysis that abides by the rules of democracy, but not by the rules of post-war liberal democracy. It is a democratic, illiberal kind of rule. And I will leave it here for the moment. A liberal democracy, then, illiberal democracy. A democracy that is not liberal. By the way, the question used by Viktor Orban. Yeah. I think a lot of the, a lot of the people wouldn't agree with Orban's definition, but I think, I don't think there's anything to argue with any of these definitions. But what I, and people who are listening to this podcast have to realize that this word is a fuzzy concept. And anybody who says that they have a precise definition is just taking a position in the field of discussion. And that definition will stand for certain other associated positions. I would like to argue, I would like to add on to these. I don't have any disagreement that with a few cautions, one populism isn't a post-war phenomenon that it goes back to. Certainly, it's endemic to, in fact, it's endemic to a republican idea of democracy. It's a theme, it's a dimension, and it's a strain. Why is it a strain? Because a democracy, let's just call it, always has a reference to the people. It always has a presupposition that there is a civil community regulated by law, and that the people vote and elect somebody. So you're never going to have a democratic process, even if it's a relatively elitist 18th century process or something more incorporated like the one we have now, that doesn't have continuous references to the people, the people should rule. I'm this movement on behalf of the people, et cetera. Obama, who's not a populist, had populist dimensions, he talked constantly about the people. The other thing is I'd say that there's a continuum of populism, therefore, that moves from within the institutions of democracy to beyond what I call radical populism, which breaks then the institutions and results in one man or one woman rule on the left or the right. Yeah, I think that I certainly agree with the idea that there's a kind of endemic feature that, especially in Republican politics, because lowercase r, Republican politics has this internal tension, and you can see populism as one kind of way that that tension comes to the surface. I think as one of the prompts for this panel, we got this quote from either Madison or Hamilton from the Federalist Papers about how even if every opinion citizen had been a Socrates, a group of them would still have been a mob. And this idea that when you, for Republican politics to work, you need a suitable number of people who are fit to the task of governing, but who in governing represent, in some sense, the will of the people and are accountable to them, but whom the people as a whole see as better than them. And that particular intrinsically elite dimension of Republican forms of democracy is, I think, unpopular in the 20th century and the 21st century. It's no longer seen as appropriate to regard the political elite as superior in virtue or in decision making or anything like that. And as a result, I think that explains why populist movements have emerged as the kind of suspicion of this idea of a governing elite who are better at the job than the rest of us. But we can see other circumstances in which these kinds of suspicions have broken forth in the past, where elites have not been able to do the job of maintaining the illusion, let's say, at least of governing well or of representing the will of the people who are remaining accountable to them. So I do think it's kind of intrinsic to Republican politics because it has this combination of a popular basis and the establishment of a governing class. I'd like to endorse that. I think that's very well put. I think that's very well put. My perspective as an American historian focuses my attention, I guess, so I'm less familiar with some of the other examples. But if we restrict populism to the post-World War II period, it leaves out the biggest episode in American history that's been labeled as populist ever since it happened. I think that's a very important part of the emergence of the So-called People's Party of the 1890s. And I think going back, there have been several conspicuous occasions in American history, again, where movements have appeared that say the people have inherently more virtue than the people who are more authentic representatives of our will. I think that was very much a characteristic of Andrew Jackson's political movement. I think they're going back into episodes of the political movement. I think that's a very much characteristic of Andrew Jackson's political movement. I think they're going back into episodes like the Whiskey Rebellion or the North Carolina regulation, even in colonial period of times, there have been mass movements with populist features like that. And I think that's one of the benefits of calling it using a fuzzy definition because you can legitimately talk about a movement with populist features without getting utterly bogged down into whatever it fits this box exactly or that one. Okay, let me try to link some dots here, if I may. Do we care about populist mass historians? That would be fine, of course. And populist has been out there in history since Memorial Times. I mean, all societies have been divided between elites and the people, right? If you go back to the Roman Republic, for example, you even find the party that is called the Populares, that was the party that went against the Senate against the optimatists, right? And the tribunes of the plebs like Tiberius Grag, who's, for example, his brother, Gaius Grag, who's where populist leaders. And this is why they were assassinated because they went against the Senate, against the elites of that time. And if you go all the way up to today, you find many, many populist movements. I mean, no one doubts about that. And when it comes to the United States, Michael Kazan has written a marvelous book about populist in the United States since the 19th century. But, and of course, Jackson was a populist leader. I mean, he was divisive. He was the one who relied on this policy system. And those are phenomena that we see in contemporary populist galore. I mean, polarization, patronist politics, et cetera. But it's not the reason. I mean, we're not historians. I mean, we care about populist because- Wait a minute. Yes, you are. You are. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean, I mean, yes. I mean, we the people, the ordinary people, okay, we are not historians like you. Now, it affects our lives. I mean, this is why there is this booming thing about, since 2016, actually, about populist because populist and populist governments affect our lives. And this stands on two puzzles. This presents us with two puzzles. First, how come that populist emerges in recent times in our liberal democracies? We used to live in liberal democracies. Now, something is happening here. We see all of those guys who are not liberal, one, but who are the most liberal. Who does D to theBed, L O Blah wha I focus on the modern times because I'm not a historian first of all and secondly because I care about the future my future and my children's future. I want, can I respond to that? I think, you know, one of the things that a historical perspective offers you is alternatives to liberal democracy. I mean, I think it depends a little bit on how optimistic or pessimistic you are about the liberal project in the post-World War II period. And if you feel that there are, you know, that the, for instance, the rise in economic inequality over the last 50 years is a, you know, it's a feature, not a bug of the liberal order. It's a consequence of concentration of certain kinds of power in the hands of some people. Then you might not be so optimistic about thinking, well, what we need to do is to get back to that. I'm very suspicious of Golden Age thinking whether it's looking back to the 17th century or looking back to the 1950s. And, you know, if there are vulnerabilities in our form of life, our form of political life, then looking to some of the alternatives and thinking in historical terms can give you perspective. And I think this, this applies, you know, even when you're thinking sort of cross-constitutionally, I find it very illuminating to think about the groggy and the land reforms when I'm trying to understand what Neran Dormodi is up to, you know, how he came to power on the back of the struggles of ordinary farmers in India and the kind of land reforms that he's put into place. Monty is not the tribe, you know, the blabs. Monty is the prime minister. So he's the senate. But he is here to draw the analogy. Go ahead, Jeff. I mean, I think that most of the populism that people are afraid of most but not all is populism of the extreme right today. There are some exceptions like Manuel Lope has Obrador in Mexico. But the fear, the ones that move to the right usually combine an anti-elitist movement on behalf of the people with a deep person was, well, that's part of populism on the left, extreme left. But also with bigotry and anti-Semitism, anti-Islamism, some kind of anti-civil discourse that targets not just an elite. I think one of you referred to that earlier, but another group as a tremendous danger so that the country or the people that they want to set up are ethnically homogeneous group. The left populist is not as concerned usually with that but thinks more in terms of the class so that there's a pure class that they will represent and they'll come to power. But they're also just at Sanders because they will then possibly eliminate members of all the other classes that the people don't represent. I was interested in this reference to virtue because of course, virtue is also, I don't want to say it's, I don't want to keep repeating that it's a fuzzy category but it's certainly not something easily defined or it can take it tomes to define virtue and yet it seems to be an engine, the issue of virtue and who has it, seems to be an engine driving these conflicts. And I think similarly, this is the idea of who are the elites because I think elitism also has been changing over time. What exactly, who are those people? Just a moment. I mean, populism comes into power quite often. I mean, it has happened in many, many places. Not only with left-wing populist like in Venezuela, for example, think about South-West and Maduro. Think about my little country Greece. We have had our serve left populist for many, many years under Poppenreu and under Tsipras more recently or under, you know, right-wing governments. Now, what happens here is when they come into power, they become the elites. How do we deal with that? I mean, populists have been in power in several countries for many, many years. They are the elites. It is very simple or simplistic to say that those are against the elites because they do become the elites. Think about Trump. Think about Orba. He has been in power since 2010, 11 years now. First, secondly, if I may, left-wing populist, right-wing populist, I alluded to that earlier, often come, they fall at tandem and they rule together. This happened again in my country in 2015 until 2019 for four years, full years. A populist party, Syriza and a right-wing party, a stream right-wing party, a native party, independent Greeks, rule together, no problem there. Or think about Peronism in Argentina. Peron was a right-winger and today the Peronist party, the Justicialist party, is a left-wing party under the Kirchner, Madam Kirchner, the father of the husband who died. So, it is not that simple. So, you are making it simple by arguing that left and right are the same. This is a common argument of people who attack populism, which is well, there is no real difference between the left populism and the right. In fact, there is a great deal of difference. Going back to what Donaje said, if there are vast structural inequalities in a country that has a democratic form of government, there should be constant movements to overthrow the people who have privilege or to restructure the society. Now, as long as you have democratic institutions, that's not going to end up in an anti-democratic form of power. It will be metabolized in various ways. But these populist threads, I think, throbbed through the history of all stratified societies that have democratic forms of government. Actually, I want to say something that might be surprising given what I said earlier, which is that I actually, I think in our contemporary global context, I want to endorse what Takah said about the contrast between populism and liberalism, because I think that is the most illuminating pairing of phenomena. But I think, one way in which there are left liberals and right liberals, and I think this helps us get some clarity on the differences in the origins of fluffing and right populism. In particular, I think there are different kinds of elites or phenomena of elite capture that drive populist movements. This might be one of the reasons there is an overlap between the left and the right, because it's not all economic. If it were just about economic elites and a corresponding sort of class critique, then we would not expect left and right wing populism to overlap. But in addition to economic elites or phenomena of economic inequality, there's also, I think, political and cultural phenomena. So I think this is especially true in the United States context where economic, political, and cultural capital come apart in very visible ways. You can think about Wall Street, K Street, and Hollywood. That's kind of the totemic, things to pin this on. So as has been documented extensively, especially in recent years, we have this phenomenon stagnation of wages and rising economic inequality in this country. But the government, I think, related to that, but separate, conceptually separate from it is the fact that our government institutions are increasingly responsive to certain kinds of private interests. And people don't feel like they have the possibility of political accountability. And that's for a wide range of reasons, including our campaigns, our electoral system and our campaign finance system, lots of other reasons. Those are the things that I care about the most. But then there's a kind of phenomenon of cultural elitism where I think we've lost a kind of mass culture that we have had in the past in various ways, which helped to unite people across different kinds of social strata. And there's a kind of, there's a sort of pluralism, a form of cultural pluralism that has taken hold in the lead institutions, like universities, and many of us are affiliated with the media, certain other kinds of institutions, that I would call a pluralism without aspiration. It says that people are essentially different from each other, and we don't have any common values around which to unite. And you have to accept these essential differences and not try to make common cause with people across those differences. And I think that particular cultural phenomenon has driven a kind of popular insurgency in the United States that crosses the left right wing distinction. Whereas I think when it comes to the economic issues, and I think to some extent the political issues, that's been much more polarized. And I think those things stand much more behind the success of someone like Bernie Sanders and Democratic Party politics than it does explain the rise of Donald Trump. But famously it was documented that in the 2016 election, people who actually were at the bottom of the economic poll went for Clinton over Trump by some extent, which put the lie to the idea that this is an economic populism that was really driving the Trump phenomenon. So I think because of this sort of plurality of forms of elitism or elites, and the ways that these come apart, I think you actually have overlapping populist energies that can get sucked into different forms of populism across the political spectrum. John Rawls had written in laws of people that liberal democracies had a sort of, I'd call it a homeostatic principle where liberal people educated in liberal democracies grew to value the democratic process so much so that they would not allow it to slip back into tyranny. And I think latter day developments and developments in history sort of put the lie to that approach, perhaps overly optimistic. Well, I think democratic forms that have created results that are profoundly alienating, disillusioning, in grieving to those who define themselves as the people, then they may decide that those democratic forms are the source of their their deprivation and may turn against those. So I think we all recognize that democracy is a lot more fragile than maybe Professor Rawls appreciated at the time he was writing it. I mean, I think that we have to realize that when we let talk us first, because I think his his feet delay kind of got him behind the behind the eight ball. Go ahead, talk us. Yeah, I'm fine. I mean, good thinking about let us see how I mean, let us see how how to how populist works. So what we have in the beginning, that's the situation of nature. We have a liberal democracy. What's a liberal democracy, right? A liberal democracy is a system that acknowledges that there are many divisions in society, class divisions, cultural divisions. So again, I'm trying to link the dots, original divisions, religious divisions, you name it, right? Now, Rawls comes and says, Hey, guys, let us play moderately. Let us know what he calls over overlapping consensus. He uses this phrase overlapping consensus. How do we do that? By applying the rule of law and protecting the rights of minorities. Now, this is liberal democracy. This is what we have. Now a guy comes, okay, and he says, because it is always a he, by the way, but I don't want to get into that. He says, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, democracies. I mean, our societies are not divided by so many divisions. We have one one over our division, the people versus the elites. Therefore, we cannot build bridges. There will be polarization. Forget it. Yes, adversity, conflict. We'll have to fight against each other. How who's going to win? We? Why? Because we are the majority, we are the people. Okay, forget rule of law, forget the protection of minority rights, etc, etc. And this is how you get wrong. And this, I just I disagree with that. I mean, you have to realize that social movements that have that society all the time. I mean, Rawls is describing an idealized. He's a political theorist. He's a normative political theorist. He's not a sociologist. You can't wear political empirical social scientists. You can't convert Rawls's idea into a empirical description of how democracy actually works in a in an actual society. So you can't criticize an actually existing society from the point of view of Rawls and say it doesn't work right. No, it, what instead we have to think about how does it work? And I think it's fascinating to me that despite the most radical right-wing challenge in American history, which was Trump, because he took the presidency. The structural differentiation of the United States, the offset of office obligations of many officeholders, the legal order, other civil associations, and the institution of journalism as a profession, it contained this very dangerous populist movement. And so we can't just broadly talk about populism taking over countries. We have to think of them as movements, and then we need to think of institutions and other kinds of virtues. I think it's sort of a populism as a stress test, I think is an interesting way of thinking about it. Insofar as it's not just individuals who are singled out as the bad elites, but actually institutions like the media, like universities, I mean, I would say the United States has passed the stress test a lot better than Hungary currently is, given the state of civil society institutions there. And that might have to do with the particular forms of decentralization of power that are possible. And power thought of very broadly not just as political power, but also as economic, cultural power. How many people know each other in certain kinds of political circles? Can a political party take over a media apparatus or not? Those kinds of things depend on networks of affinity that are much harder to pull off in a country of 330 million people. Oh, no, I don't think that's exactly true. I mean, we have big countries like Brazil and Turkey. I think if you have a democracy for 200 years and you have a gradual institutionalization of professions, I mean, most of the weak the illiberal democracies, including Greece, including Poland, including Hungary, including Brazil, are very recently established. They have very, very fragile. Look in the liberal democracy. No, it's not, but it has a very unstable democracy. It has added in the past, your references to the right. I mean, it's a great democracy is very stable. I'm sorry. I mean, I mean, we didn't say now it's almost 50 years in the scheme of things. That's not very wrong. I'm sorry. I mean, I'm glad about it. That's fine. That's fine. No problem. No problem. I don't take that personally. Don't worry. But, you know, democracies, right. I mean, the thing is that when a populist party comes into power, and this just happened in Greece, as I said earlier, I mean, I've lived through this. I mean, this is the story of my life as a matter of fact. They stop the weakened institutions. And then another populist may come down the road, and then another one. And then you do not know what will happen to your democracy. And this is what happened in the Republican room, by the way, after Tiberius Gracus, we mentioned earlier that 60 years down the road, another guy came that's in it, I'm called Marius, and another one called Silla, and then Bruce's, and then the Republic was gone. This is what we get. I mean, I cannot see how Hungary, for example, of Poland can go back to even weak liberalism. Yes, those are weak liberal democracies, but liberal have been in the past. This is what I'm saying. Greece might go down that same road again. I know what you mean. I mean, I didn't mean to disagree with you, but democracy has been stable in Greece for a number of years, but the institutions are not that strong. Yes, I know what you mean. So I don't disagree with you at all. But it is exactly those feeble institutions that charismatic leader, because there's charisma there, and there is agency, they may win power over and over again and lead those democracies to some authoritarian direction. That is the fear. So this populism is a deep tendency in, I would say, all societies, and it's counteracted by what? By deeply structured autonomous institutions committed to certain virtues that are deeply professionalized by strong civic traditions, but that won't stop the populist impulse. And the populist impulse can be very productive if you have these institutions. It can lead to reforms, like the working man's movement in the 19th century, or socialism being transformed into social democracy and the big welfare state in Western Europe. And these are very positive developments, but then you can have something like the peasant movements in China, and the workers and peasants movement in Russia that end up creating dictatorships that last for a long, long, long time. They don't have populism. Right? They don't have populism. One point I want to make, and I challenge here, is that I do not know in the modern world, again, any case in which anywhere the liberal world, meaning the Americas, Europe, Canada, Australia, etc, Japan, any case in which populist has had positive outcomes that populist have been positive after being in power. Olivia? Well, I honestly think that's one of the advantages of his job, with respect, because it gives you a lot more examples of populist movements that have been very beneficial. And I think the working men's party in the United States is a good example. I think the People's Party in the 1890s was a good example. I think we can all think of revolutionary movements that looked maybe pretty awful and close, but had beneficial results over a longer array. So let me put in a plug for historical examples in a historical perspective, because I think that gives us a much more complicated nuanced view of what the possibilities are. Would there be a way to distinguish? I mean, I focus on modern populism. Yeah. Would there be a way to distinguish? I know this is not likely, but good populist movements. What is that maybe in a good populist movement that leads to reform versus one that seems to be what we use the words divisive, polarizing, etc. I don't think polarization is necessarily bad. I mean, I think the fracturing of civil society is bad. And maybe that's a characteristic effect of long-term polarization. But if we think about corruption is obviously one phenomenon we can identify. It's possible for a mass movement to demand more accountability from political actors and economic actors for that matter that reduces corruption. And that's something that's quite measurable. And I would say that that's one phenomenon. Another, the reason I brought up Bolivia is that inequality has gone down. And of course, yeah, under Morales, who has obviously had authoritarian tendencies, which we should think are bad to maintain power and to self-aggrandize in certain ways. But infrastructure spending is massively up. The welfare of people in rural poverty is massively up in Bolivia over that timeframe. And you might think that's a happy accident of the resource extraction economy and market prices and so on. There's disagreement to be had. But one interpretation of those events is that that was a situation in which this is especially a problem in petrostates or resource dependent states that that money gets tied up in the hands of a handful of people and does not get used to bring people out of poverty. Of course, Norway is a petrostate too, and they seem to do a pretty good job of taking care of people there. And you can see how resource extraction can be to the benefit of a welfare state and to the welfare of the worst off people. And I think there are different trajectories that a populist movement can take. And I think Venezuela versus Bolivia is an interesting contrast because of the relatively similar timeframes. I mean, Bolivia is a very unusual movement of a very unusual example of left populism. I mean, radical left populism staying within the tracks barely of democracy and the recent elections. A great example of a populist being re-elected again after an interim liberal. But I mean, I'd like to ask the panel, what about the surging of black people's movements in the United States from the 1960s? That's a social movement. And they call themselves the people acting on behalf of the people. I mean, they have charismatic leaders. How do you fit that in? I mean, there's this tendency to look at the issue as elites dominating or populism. But there's very positive social movements starting with the socialist or working people's movements in the 19th century. So I'd like, why do you deal with the mass movement against racial oppression? In the, how do you classify that in these terms? Mass movements are part of, you know, they fit very well in the framework of a liberal democracy. I mean, those mass movements have two flurries. They may flurries. They may have their leaders as long and they may act and produce their results as long as they abide by the rules of liberal democracy by the institutions. I mean, nothing problematic about those movements. I mean, what I would say, let me say that Bolivia, Bolivia, Bolivia is not a good example. Because Bolivia is the only country in Latin America in which you have the majority of the population is in the US. So if you don't take the ratio issue, you cannot make sense of Bolivia. And you cannot compare Bolivia to any other country in Latin America and the world, actually, because, and this is what Morales was an Indian, right? So here, I'll get the support of his, of his people, essentially. And he became president of Bolivia. And then the end was not very happy. It was a very unhappy end. But that was, I mean, Bolivia is not comparable because of the racial composition of the country. So let us leave Bolivia out. It's a bad case. It sounds like it's a case that doesn't fit your priors. And that's why it's a bad case. I think it's a very interesting and it's a very limited case. But anyway, I want to I want to respond to the question about what I think I examine. I mean, I mean, I think I answered by, you know, data. I mean, I'm giving you data. And there is something that that distinguishes Bolivia. And this is a race. Well, let me talk about race in America for a moment. So I think I think the 1963 March on Washington is a fantastic example of what the civil rights movement accomplished and what it didn't. You know, this is the March on Washington for jobs and freedom. And the writing of American history, the jobs part has dropped out. The minimum wage that is being debated in our country now is roughly roughly corresponds to the minimum wage that was one of the main demands of that march, a $2 minimum wage in 1963, which works out to something like $15 or $16 I think today. And it didn't get passed. And in general, you know, people remember the I have a dream and the content of the character and things like that. And that's been written into sort of American history, but not the economic demands. And, you know, I think the profound failures of the labor movement, both through internal fracturing and through external pressures and the failure of the kind of regulatory apparatus in the government side, that is that is one of the reasons for the continued massive gap and wealth between black Americans and other Americans. And, you know, one way of looking at that is that the civil rights movement was a beginning, you know, obviously guaranteeing civil rights in legislation and constitutions is crucial. But it was seen as only one piece of a larger platform of changes to the material benefit of black people that have largely not been realized in the country. And I think from that perspective, you know, that I think is a huge stain. And I think there will be, you know, there's a continued opportunity in that front on that front for multi racial coalitions of people within the labor movement and another and other venues in America. And I think there will be a kind of resurgence of economic populism along those lines before too long, because it looks like the basically center left and center right policies of the democratic and republican parties are not sufficient to address those kinds of problems. But what I was really asking is whether the black movements in the 20th century have don't they have many of the elements of populism, not whether they're incompatible with liberal democracy? No, no, I think I think they absolutely did. And I think their economic dimensions are underplayed. So that's what I was suggesting is that actually seeing them as a thing seeing that seeing that that movement as an economic populist movement is really essential to understanding what it was. Yeah, exactly. And they also critique the white even if you take the non economic dimensions, they were a movement and our movement against an elite. They called the white elite. And just as the women's movement is has been very, very anti black male elite. It's been a mass movement of attack on on on male power. I mean, the me too movement. These are massive uprisings of people in a quote unquote class that I regard as a part of this populist impulse that nobody would call them populace though, because they like them too much or many of the elites like them too much. Harry, well, I would say there if I could interject just a moment, I think those are the women's movement or the civil rights movement are good examples of movements with populist features. But the race based civil rights movement cannot claim any United States to represent the whole people because African Americans are what 20% of the population, 11% of the population in some counts. We've seen in recent years coalition building efforts. So now you hear about black and brown people or broader or Black, Latins and Indigenous. And so there's there's coalition building, but nevertheless the civil rights movement doesn't claim to represent the whole people. But it jevries absolutely right there. It has very strong populist features. Women's movement the same way the women's movement can represent half the people, but not the whole people. So this I think is one of the benefits of fuzzy categories is you can say look at the populist features of civil rights, look at the populist features of anti sexism and make those kind of productive comparisons without getting hung up on just exactly how well they fit your prior definition. Are these are these movements we're describing now the degree they partake of populism as a as a driving force. Do they succeed to the degree that they also partake of some they moderate this sort of radical part of it. I think MLK is a good example of someone who sort of promised to white folks that he was not a radical. And I think to some degree that was helpful I think abolitionists also a century earlier tried to make the case or win over the hearts of the rest of the country as a way to sort of spear and some of them of course were quite radical. But is it is that the case that the sort of moderating their how I would go to the to the radicalism effort but I would say that populist movements like minority populist movements if we can use that expression succeed to the degree to which they can build a majority coalition by persuading people outside their base that hey I think that's just or I can see how our people would benefit from that also. So the degree to which they can build coalitions for radical measures or radical measures but the point is that they can move towards a majority in a democratic framework. Yeah I mean I am at the loss test. I think that's a good point. I mean the idea of a civil sphere or a republic has the idea that there's a vital center. And if if a populist movement moves too far to the right or the left it says I don't care. Oh I think we have. We will. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Who else wants to jump in? I mean I want to endorse that point. I think the kind of stability of movement depends on coalition building in important ways. And this is one of the puzzles is that yes you set yourself up against the elite and you might complain about the domination of certain kinds of institutions by the elite. But do you want to get rid of the institutions themselves or do you want to innovate them so fully that they can't function? That's the point of which I think this starts to become sort of consumptive of the civil sphere or the republican spheres. I think Jeff was saying. Jeff I think you're freed up. You want to finish your thoughts? I'm not sure where I was cut off. It's hard to finish but when I didn't know. I was saying that I mean if a movement on the right or the left moves away and says I give up on the Bible center I'm going to establish a power simply on behalf of my own movement. So in that sense black power in terms of black panther that was a populism. They spoke to the people all the time by the way. And Trump as to the good point that Harry Mann, I mean Trump spoke on behalf of the people all the time but we know it was on behalf of only white people. His people especially white people and he left out. So this tension is always there of course. Let me go back to social movements if I may. When I went to school we call them movements and the whole field was called consensus politics. So there was a eighties nineies etc. The whole gamut emerged around the time and they were asking power essentially. And the most important of those movements was the Green movement of course. They created lots of parties in Europe some of the parties formed coalition governments and those are in power even today in a number of countries. Now those movements are the gist and the essence of liberal democracy. We need those those movements because they do not go against the constitution. They want to change how politics works. They bring in new issues. Why do we call them populist? The world populist did not exist back then. I mean we knew that Peron was populist but none understood what the term meant. So those movements are always there are a very sensual part of democracy. They don't populistly speak for particular electorates constituencies. And that's that. What about the sort of making some claims. I was going to say what about laying some claim to a particular kind of virtue. You know some particular sort of virtue based on their who they are as a people that is a component of this. These movements. They are not there as people. They are there as carriers of particular interests. They want all goals. Political goals. Aims. They want a better you know a better climate. Green development. Feminist movement for example. I mean they want to pursue the interests and the rights of the feminist movement for example. And then let me ask something the whole panel because this is a very interesting question. I mean this is the one of the elephants in the group. There's a number of elephants when it comes to populism. What do we mean when we say the people. I mean do we mean the nation like you know make America great again. Do we mean the underprivileged strata all over the place. The poorer people. The ordinary people. Do we mean the the the working class in which case where the Marxist domain for example. Do we mean race like in Bolivia. Do we mean. Like in India. In India for example. Who are the people in India. Define the people. Well according to Modi is Hindus. Right I mean it's pretty straightforward in some case what the relevant form of populism is trading on. Changing the laws on citizenship is a pretty clear move to define the people. And if you want to look at a concrete political action you know the 2009-19 citizenship act. You know to make it impossible for large numbers of Muslims living in India to to remain or or become citizens. You know that that kind of religious test is a pretty clear you know attempt to to find the boundaries. So what do you say like the people that does not exist. The people the people is made. The people that does not exist. The people is made. Yep it is a construction right. I mean Buddha talked about that I mean the making of the class. So you have a populist leader who makes his own people and then he has his own clients for going to vote for him and he's going to stay there in power forever and that's that. Enjoy. It's a function of language to a degree to label some group and it's interesting now and I wanted to open up the conversation to incorporate information the flow of information we talked about you know the free press and how that's important and it's it's attacked by populist leaders demagogues anyway is often a part of their game plan. You know labeling any group with any label elite people you know is a language game in a way right. But I wonder how much you all think information and how it flows and who controls it has an effect on populism. I mean I think this is one of the differences in modern populist movements is now the attempt to bypass traditional media and use social media. You know that that's that's one way of kind of doing and doing an end run. I think that's that's been proven to be pretty pretty successful worldwide in various cases. You know movements depend on on filtering the reality for the people in the movement so that it it it recapitulates the the tenets of the movement but every social movement for the last 200 years has always had its own newspapers its own its own you know you didn't need social media to have hit but right. And yet grasping a new form of communication has been effective for populist movements and not just in our lifetimes in a early republican society where communication was based on drawing room conversation it's suddenly introduced mass circulation newspapers and political rallies with hundreds of people. That's that's a new form of political communication and it can be very effective. Often populist are very innovative in their political techniques and seizing new forms of political communication can be you know part of the part of the winning strategy. Well but Obama was a was a campaigner and president who introduced a digital revolution first. Yeah and you can you can see how you know you can have these features of populism without maybe being a full-throated populist and of course populist leaders are very good at learning you know these kinds of techniques and adapting them and it it takes time and I think you know the the common thread is a kind of attempted direct communication unmediated by the kinds of traditional institutional actors. So instead of you know primary politics in America have changed dramatically in the last 25 years. It used to be that you know it was a very is a hyper local sort of phenomenon and you had to have the kind of grassroots organizing which meant that you had to get hold of people but going back to Howard Dean up to the present you know the internet has really changed that the flow of money has changed the flow of information has changed there's been a kind of nationalization of party primaries and that that's really changed the influence of political parties and their ability to keep certain kinds of radical people out out of you know presidential primaries in the US and I think that's that's a fascinating change and lots of people are learning that lesson all across the political spectrum all sort of all at once. I would put that in a broader perspective because it is not only the the type of the medium the type of the how do they try to reach larger audiences and what do they do the technique it is that obviously this when they come into power they try to silence the practice that opposes the rule. So I would I would put that in the broader framework of institutions because what we see the play book there the populist playbook is that when they take power they attack the institutions all of them press is one of them freedom of the press they attack the judiciary okay they go against the courts we saw that in America we saw that in all other cases populist who okay they they try to violate the division of powers they try to control education so they they meditate against institutions of liberal democracy hence my definition of democratic liberalist okay and this is very typical I mean there is not any case of populist rule that I happen to know that you do not see the same moves over and over again it's like you know a playbook and they do exactly the same thing. I think then the fact that we know there are actors China Russia in particular who have made an effort to redirect the conversation on or the ideas flowing through social media that that's an important aspect of what we're seeing in modern modern times. These are not the most important questions though. I think we can sign them China nor questions or are the democracies. Say that again I'm sorry but I was repeat that. Talk to you repeat that. Okay for some reason I think he's sorry yeah I didn't say anything. Okay all right I think the ideas we will open up some of the questions that have come from the audience and Alex is here to help guide us through that. Yeah so if anyone wants to write more. There's only I don't have one question so far well I guess too from us who's Anna Black through the Zoom so if anyone has any questions please write it in the Q&A part or on the chat and I'll relay it. So Susanna Black wrote something I guess based on what sort of Jeffrey had asked which was our contemporary race since sex focused progressive movements populist or anti-pop list. Can you speak to distinction between class based left populism of the 2016 Bernie type and contemporary progressive politics which tend to center issues other than in class. It may tend in certain cases to reinforce existing institutional power i.e. the phenomenon of world capitalism and then they wrote alternatively how can we do a better job in creating a common good politics that speaks to and includes all people in a polity as opposed to ontologizing the division or antagonism between the people and the elites is that possible or desirable. I mean one thing that I was saying earlier I think response to that which is that you know there's different kinds of different forms of pluralist politics and one of them is sort of concerned with say the rectification of historical or present injustices and attempts to you know point to places where people cannot meet on an even footing in the public sphere as is desired by the principles of republican politics and I think you know we don't have a lot of talk about our republican form of government anymore. We spend very little time you know there's attention is paid to the eroding of our institutions or to certain kind you know issues about you know dark money in our politics and so on. We don't talk very much about things like well citizens need certain kinds of virtues for our system of government to survive the very things that you can see littered all over the federalist papers as I mentioned at the beginning and I think one result of that is that we get a kind of empty pluralist politics which says not taking into account whether people are subject to any form of injustice or meeting each other and even playing field that certain kinds of identities are more important than one's identity as a citizen and need to be sort of celebrated or valued in certain ways and to some extent this is a kind of this is fine because it might be pushing back against a homogenizing impulse that's also inappropriate a large plural society but unless it's framed with a certain set of aspirations about what we want to do together in civil society my fear is that it tends to be more you know to contribute to certain kinds of fracturing that make it impossible to have broad coalition based politics of a kind that you know is in defense of our of our common life so that's that's sort of my my concern about what I call pluralism without aspiration or empty pluralism that I think maybe certain certain strands of progressive politics point in this direction not all of them and I think it's very easy to sort of paint different political movements and dismiss them and I don't mean to be doing that but that's that's the sort of reservation that I have I really like to endorse that uh uh and j but cause you mentioned the federalist papers and the invocation of virtue over and over again um in the federalist papers going past that word virtue um to think about what um people in that era meant by the word virtue when you were talking about public life they meant and virtue to them was the ability to set aside narrow personal self-interest and to advocate for the common good however that might be defined um and the pitfall there was that every pluralistic group tended to define the common good as their good and it's sort of uh collapsed into um brokerage liberalism but um if there were a way for us to recapture a vision of the common good or to advocate for a vision of the common good that would embrace more than um uh relatively small certainly minority sized slices of the population then I think we'd be um taking a step in the right direction one of the problems is that the word virtue was so hokey these days that anybody who stands up and tries to advocate for it can get I guess I guess we're supposed to say good character now or something like that or something like that I mean I disagree with both of you guys I think that virtues are completely at the heart of all most of our public discourse today and that the idea that we need to go back to an earlier smaller form of republicanism based on you know the Greeks or the founding fathers it is it's not right because virtues still are here for example when people say Trump was selfish and he only cared about himself and then his opponents argued we need somebody who cares about the whole society that's as virtue talk when when somebody says people are dishonest when they say they're corrupt when they say that they're irrational or insane that they don't have common sense these are the this concern with virtue permeates left right and center in in all these democracies so I don't think that the way to get a good society is is to say that we need a new set of virtues I think that in fact there's an ideal of a good society in back of left right and center except for the extremes and that that ideal is going to be incorporated in a partisan way through ideology you will never have us all sharing this whole thing but we'll have us talking about it all the time but I want to push back on that because I think I think a lot of the a lot of the you know if you look at the polling people thought that Trump was not very honest or a or a public-minded person when they voted for him and that's the scandal right that the thought is and and you he doesn't have to be Trump in particular you can apply it to whoever else you like the idea is that virtue is it should be a criterion for high office and it should also be what we try to promote in society rather than factional interest rather than monetary benefit and this is true of of technocratic liberals on the left as well as the right that they want to measure the flourishing of the society based on how much money is in your pocketbook or how good you feel about things rather than rather than character and I think that that is the part of Republican the Republican ideal that that is lacking not all of our moral talk is virtue talk of course I agree with that yes okay and so and Trump you're taking a poll that says polls are impossible to use as ways of judging how people think of of leaders but I'm sure that people thought that Trump his supporters that he has the virtue of telling the truth and truthfulness is a virtue it's an important virtue well isn't virtue or pretend virtue what essentially ends up creating the groups yeah I mean but the thing is we can't try to find what's the true virtue I mean not if we stand back and look at the discourse of a complex pluralistic society every group will claim that it has the right virtue right but that's what creates the group yeah I agree totally it is but I think that's also what creates the aggression between the groups because I think my virtue is better than your virtue and therefore you are wrong and so I can attack you yes but if you want to see what is an operational definition of a better society to me as a more uh in cooperative one that allows more people the use of their full uh life forces that and and I think that that's really what Trump the right populace are a reaction against the expansion of the civil sphere in the United States and so Susan I would be so I wouldn't be so depressed about this I'm not I don't I think that these movements are reactions against progress that we may be in store for another few years of our progressive movement not a populist one maybe maybe maybe take a different approach perhaps I like this discussion about virtue of course we need that we we need tons of that but thinking about our lives and about the future and about what we're going to do in future let's see what are the problems first of all I mean what are the problems we face as humanity public health pandemic next epidemic the other one the third one that's it how important are you having another? I mean my greatest multiculturalist fourth I think I mean what do we do I mean with an ethos who happened to live in the same neighborhood and finally the survival of democracy it is not evident that our democracies will survive forever now my question is this I will make two points actually first I think that in all of those things technocracy technology is very crucial in all of those things and I think that populists are very much inimical to technology and technocracy it is the elite after all okay we don't like the elites because we're populists but it so happens but among the elites most of the technocrats from Bill Gates to you know the universities where all of you teach in the United States you are very fond of technocracy and technology and populists don't like that so we have to do something about it so populists do not play a positive role and my second point is that populists do not solve any of those big problems apparently accept or theoretically accept inequality but do they have the means do they have the policies do they have the agenda to solve socio-economic inequality so I will leave it here by saying that liberal democracy is the only and better solution that we have and we have to improve the institutions of our liberal democracies and this is the stance I will take in this discussion maybe the panelists could respond to the fish prime question that's on yeah yeah all I'll read it out up for you so the first one Scott wrote thank you Scott for writing these questions the first one he wrote was what do the panelists think about the idea popular and communitarian thought and again after Trump that the rise of right-wing populists movements in the United States is a result of a hollowing out of America's civil society and engagement in local politics is a big part of left and right-wing populism some sort of illusion of national engagement in politics that replaces the vital role of engagement in community life in societies we'll talk about a second question and then the second one excuse me it seems that all right-wing populism is immediately labeled fascism by the left media and all left-wing populism is immediately labeled socialism by the right-wing media and that ultimately this prevents any real engagement for the country with the very real problems that generate these movements and give demagogues like Trump a platform how can we engage with people's outrage in a more constructive way than populism or labeling people's grievances as politically radical and therefore invalid I think I'll just say briefly I really like that second point I think it's very it's really fascinating and important which is that populism tends to be a label of denigration often used to undermine the the valid dimension of massive social movements we are right to be very worried about the anti-democratic dimensions as tarkies has talked about throughout at the same time we I think we want to respond to Trumpism by saying it reveals as Don and Jay's talk about the underlying displacement of masses of Americans economically so I think that's a good point that you know populism is is a label that is right to use in a sense to pollute the anti-democratic and demagoguet aspect but yet usually populism responds to deep fractures that need to be repaired in a society I mean I think you know one thing we can think about is sort of what is what is government for and what are the limits of what government can achieve and you know what what what what are political movements for and when I think about economic issues or issues of distributive justice or even issues of access to certain kinds of institutions those seem like places where you know government can do something and ought to do something but if the grievances are related to there are too many brown people in my neighborhood I don't think that's something that government should be in the business of doing quite the opposite right so you know politics of grievance can be politics-allegitimate grievance or illegitimate grievance and we have to hold the line on you know we have a multicultural plural society I'm an immigrant a legal immigrant and a naturalized citizen of this country and I've also immigrated to other countries I spent some years living in the UK and and I think that that's been central to the kind of American experiment the American National Ideology and politicians of all strikes should should agree with that but you know we can also say that these kinds of grievance politics are exacerbated by certain kinds of economic phenomena and you can you can you don't have to respond directly to people's feelings but you can respond to what their feelings might be driven by if you think that's a legitimate side for government intervention in a problem of distributive justice or a problem of equality and rights and you know again going not to sort of jump on the republican hobby horse too much but you know solidarity is also a word that's kind of dropped out of our politics the fraternite element of you know our republican imagination and I think there ought to be a bigger space for solidarity not just you know solidarity among say the working class or anything like that but solidarity across class divisions across racial divisions and this is really central and needs to be restored to our politics too and that's the you know insofar as we think of populism as a bad thing you know I think part of the appropriate response also has to be building a culture of solidarity well I would say that populism can be redeemed if you will it is not always bad if it embraces a a coalition building ethos that says let's reach out to other aggrieved people who don't look exactly like us and let's build a real movement then populism can be a very good thing I guess so far as to say that populism created liberal democracy from the 18th century forward it's not automatically an opposite force that we have to choose either or instead we need we need desperately to have a populist element in liberal democracy and we need it to have a a coalition building ethos to it that's how you you get things done in a majority based political system and I mean what about going back to talk at this first point about illiberal democracy being a definition but in that there are certain virtues associated with illiberalism they're actually what they call with these folks who promote it call their virtues and it's interesting to think well what are those and how might we neutralize them or engage them in a way that's more constructive can you be more specific about the virtues of illiberal democracy well let's see so I could one comes to mind if the elites are overly educated in their eggheads they don't really know how the playing folk what they experience what they do there's this there's this virtue which is we don't listen to experts right in fact listening to experts is considered a negative virtue right so that would be an example of what I mean also I think that there's such a thing as impartiality whether anyone might strive towards impartiality I was I've made this comment several times that you know Trump made a comment about their they're a republican judges and they're democratic judges and Justice Roberts said oh no no they're not and Trump said well of course they are you know you're being a chump and uh he was going to speak the truth on that occasion of course yeah but we have a we have a we have a lifetime appointment super legislature that runs that runs large parts of our our public life of course we do every single political scientist would tell you that right but wait wait okay but yes if people want to write and if people let both seem to endorse that claim of Trump's which I would say is unfortunate in this sense that it's it's uh not prescriptive of the democratic spirit right because judges do think they're being impartial and we have ways of discerning people who tend to be impartial were deliberative in their judgments and people who are not and I think everyone can recognize that we're usually can and it's an important virtue that I don't hear from it very much and not to use a clang term but just on the point of indivi of impartiality I mean one issue we haven't spoken about is nationalism versus cosmopolitanism that's a different version of but it's it's complementary to what you're saying and illiberal politics are usually highly nationalistic and explicitly anti-cosmopolitan which they associate cosmopolitanism with intellectuals choose uh and and you know other people like bankers etc. Just can I can I go to Jerry's point about expertise because I think this is really interesting um I mean I I think listening to experts you you framed it very carefully listening to experts is a good thing we might think because there are problems that arise in complex political societies that require expertise to address them but rule by experts is bad anti-democratic and inappropriate um you know and that there's a there's a strain of anti-democracy on the technocratic left just as there is on the uh you know the kind of um hyper nationalist or a hyper populist right which wants to exclude people from voter rolls and things like that um and you know one way of being anti-democratic is being technocratic to technocratic and saying um I think a great example of this is in you know in the current pandemic um we've had this kind of polarized response to public health guidance um that either wants to say well public health experts are the right people to make these political decisions on our behalf and Anthony Fauci should decide whether we should shut down or not which fails to recognize that there's a lot there are lots of goals uh political goals that we have in a public health crisis that have to be balanced against each other and I think this is this comes out most clearly in the conversation about school closures like even after it's been you know it seems like schools can be reopened pretty safely it's become a kind of principle in certain corners of the left uh in in our kind of current political system to say no the schools have to stay shut um which ignores the massive inequality to this drive so when you think about the the radically higher effects of school closures um poorer and minority children and you know so I think I think you know thinking you're just realizing that there's no such thing as political expertise um that there's only political wisdom uh which is to say there's a sense of the different kinds of goals that we're trying to pursue uh on behalf of all of us and we have in a set of imperfect people who are sufficiently different from each other who are going to deliberate and figure this out but they're not they're not experts in anything they should listen to experts and so far as expert knowledge is is relevant and available and of course saying you never listen to experts is just as foolish as saying always listen to experts but I think there's actually there's a deeper truth that we can that there's not a nonpartisan truth about about the nature of politics that we can we can get to here just by careful reflection on what it is that we're doing when we're deliberating together I think one of the things that gives expertise a bad name is that experts claim their authority on universal characteristics they would say we know the scientific truth and that's good for everybody and we sort of insist that it go down when in fact they're advocating a set of policies that benefit a very narrow slice of the population so when experts claim to be to have universal validity but actually are being very selfish then that's a perfect ticket for getting discredited on on the populist level so I think one of the reasons one of the things that sets off populist movements is that the elites really have failed for people and that means that if information based elites that is experts want to retain the respect of the public and they've got to kind of keep doing a gut check about whether their advice is truly beneficial for people at large or only a fraction. Well last century in his public opinion Walter Lippmann had written about the use of stereotypes as a potent force in driving public opinion how much they repressed ideas as much as they put forward ideas which is an interestingly psychoanalytic way of looking at stereotypes but I would say that the issue about let's say experts and expertise is that in this information marketplace some of these stereotypes end up acting as tokens and the sort of subtleties that you just both of you just expressed about expertise which is wonderful and should be out there ends up being repressed pushed away because of the effect of these stereotypes. Okay how many how many questions are we feeling sorry just because there's one on YouTube and I have one myself but I don't want to abuse my position as a Q&A moderator so if that's kosher so there's one on YouTube and then I could give mine if that's okay with all of you otherwise I'll just do the one on YouTube. What's no no you can do not sue okay okay you're both okay so so the one on YouTube is from Robert Price thank you Robert. So Robert wrote what is the balance between identity versus issue or virtue with regard to intensity of emotions are different orders of passion generated by identity and issues or virtues. I mean just I just like to say that a lot of anti-populists let me let me try. Wait hold on Taka's we got a little delay here but Jeff why don't you go first then we'll take you Taka's. I think that's a good question because a lot of the fear of populism is the fear of emotions in politics as endangering supposedly the virtue of deliberative rationality and I don't agree with that I think that sociologically mass movements are emotional and in that sense they all engage in stereotypes they engage in in passion and non rational behavior that that gives them if you want to start from every the center yes it gives them a dimension of populism but it doesn't make an anti-democratic. Taka's. Well more or less what Jeffrey said but from a slightly different perspective I do not understand why mass movements are emotional I think they are rational to a very large extent but let us not argue about that. I think that again trying to answer both questions I was listening to you earlier guys I mean talking about perhaps populists might be a good thing and populists created liberales and you know to the technology and I was thinking from my little place in Europe because I'm in Europe that if I remember well you had an election a few months ago in the United States and the whole society became very much polarized about those issues the role of the motions the role of technology what do we do with you know COVID-19 how do we face that and you know rationality, technocracy etc etc so did you forget about that so populist was not a good thing and this is why the American people voted for you know a different administration and non-populist one because that was the issue I mean a liberalist versus liberalist. Now the interesting thing here is that emotions versus rationality are populists it's always about words about ethos about emotions about resentment resentment vindictiveness those are crucial feelings behind theorize of populist movements on the other hand you have rationality problem solving making positive some games not zero some games how to build positive some games this is not the game of populism this is the game of liberalism okay so that is the the thing that has the balance that has to be achieved in our societies I mean how much emotion how much rationality what do we want how do we what do we prefer what do we choose when you know the tips go down like now with COVID for example so that is you're describing this as an art person right now. Well it seems to me no they go to this is another example of the importance of a long-term perspective because populism was part of the collapse of the Soviet Union populism was throughout the Arab Spring that didn't work out as well as it should have but populism is part of the legacy of the American and French revolutions and that ultimately strengthens liberal democracy populism can can be an enormously liberating thing in the proper context and so that's why I'd like to keep a window open to the the positive aspects of populism because in the law in historical long-run there it has been very important to my to my way thank you anyway that is fully legitimate hurry I understand that of course but I don't forget that there was a populist president in your country a few months ago yes yes so I think that's a perfect example I think our the remarks you've made and the remarks I've made are good examples of the way that populism has in effect a two-faced character it can be beneficial and it can be very harmful and you know like like so many other things it it needs to be deployed properly Alex you want to go ahead and fire away with your question yeah so I kind of want to put the mirrors on to the populist leaders so what do you think about this statement the populism that we see especially amongst Trump and the other leaders you mentioned is is a reflection of the road in competence and sadism and incompetence being even emotional and confidence and so I've heard references to Venezuela and then some of Modi's failed policies in India like with the land reform and I think the demonetization that was a complete catastrophe but I also thought of a funnier example I think it's also rather telling is the MVP so the member of European Parliament from Hungary I can't I don't want to pronounce his name because I'm not going to get it right but he wrote the Constitution of Hungary that Hungary currently has on his iPad he made gay marriage illegal and he was found in Belgium at a orgy amongst like 20 other men during the lockdown with ecstasy on him and so he's like oh that's not mine but boy it is like you know that's I the other reason I came up with this besides that funny story is that in Hayek Friedrich Hayek's wrote the serfdom when he looks back on the collectivism amongst Nazism Italian fascism and US sarcommism that you have these characters who really exact really brutal like this brutalism amongst the people and you really sort of wonder what would these people be doing if they didn't live in these societies in this way like would they have this political power and then lastly to bring it more modern if you look at the distinction in immigration policy between Trump and Obama they did similar things Obama deported I think more people than Trump did and a lot of the pictures of kids in cages were also during Obama I think Obama was better in general I'm not I'm just saying like what I guess yeah so what line do we draw between like this incompetence and sadism seen amongst these populist leaders versus I guess what we see with leaders that we're saying are normal or you know fit the mold that are not populist I mean I think there's definitely a dimension to which some of these differences are about language about the kind of form of political communication and I'm always very interested in what the actual material impact of people's policies are rather than in the way they talk but you have to admit that you know the way that the politicians and leaders talk does have an effect on the limits of acceptable discourse on the demonization of minorities in particular I mean I think I think especially if you look at the the corruption that has come hand in hand with with populist leaders all over the map you know the kind of patronage politics or cronyism that those are those are very material impacts that you can see like our contracts going to the friends of this charismatic leader or not so that those kinds of very concrete authoritarian tendencies I think are important to keep in mind in competence that's interesting I mean the tendency is for populist leaders to come in from the outside but not always right Modi is a good example he was a sort of normal part of of BJP politics for a very long time before he came to power and it was only because he was stained from from the 2002 scandal in Gujarat the sectarian violence there that he he had to wait his time before he could he could successfully run for higher office and he did you know he was kind of forgiven by the elite in various ways for his role in that and you know I think some of some of his trade policies and international development policies and infrastructure policies have worked and some of them have been disastrous but you know the I think the lasting legacy is not going to be sort of the normal politics but rather the demonization of Muslims the reconstruction of India not as a secular but as a Hindu country and if we think about Trump and his effect we have a kind of nationalist strain a xenophobic strain in our politics that has not succeeded before post-World War II I mean other people have had this strain you know think about Pat Buchanan and various other people who have been sort of openly nationalistic but you can just sort of say white nationalist things as a normal member of the Republican Party especially at the local level and that's seen as acceptable and that's a change from the top so I think I think that's the kind of that's that's the the worrisome legacy outlasting any of the incompetence or the competence of particular economic or tax policy or whatever else you've got. Okay well what do you mean by incompetent? Can I? Yeah well yeah because I yeah because even sort of saw this with because yeah just sorry just to clarify because you know with the with the people who stormed the Michigan State House and then even the people who stormed the Capitol building on June January 6th there was this idea that they were larping like their live action role playing and so this idea that they're enacting a fantasy and then in a way when people talk about even Trump and some of the policies he did a lot of the time you're like what you know what like why is he hiring these people who are obviously not good at their jobs like he's not good at his job to pick competent people so that's what I meant by I guess incompetence in that way and I guess even mentally or emotional incompetence would be with the you know talking about the guy from Hungary obviously having maybe being closeted and then enacting and then creating a constitution doesn't allow you know civil rights to gay and lesbian couples so I guess that's it's yeah it's not the most concise definition of incompetence but that's sort of what I just think it works because I mean yeah I mean the Hungarian guy I mean this happened here in my neighborhood by the way three weeks ago four weeks ago he was you know he was a creep I mean he went to that boardy and he was caught and tried to escape the police he was taken to the police station etc etc I mean that's that's that's okay he was a hypocrite anyways I mean he's one of the students of all-bound in Budapest but that's not the point the point is that police leaders when they come to power they have proven their competence okay they're strong charismatic leaders in most of the cases they create from scratch their own parties like Chavez like Orbn himself by the way like Perusconi or they take over parties created by others like your Trump for example right or Peron he created his own party Alberto Fichimorin Pero created his own party Rafael Correa in Ecuador so those are important strong people with great you know blunt ideas about the future and they apply radical policies now they may be competent in implementing their policies I don't disagree with that of course but they are very charismatic leaders in all the cases there's not any case of charismatic leaders that I know again empower that has not had previously a charismatic leader so it is that's a fact yeah all right well I think we should as much as I'd like to you this go on this has been a wonderful conversation I would say it's incredible I think it's time to wrap up I want to again thank our our participants for such a lively conversation and our audience too for their their participation and their listening again we're going to be reconvening on what was the date I gave you March 20th for the placebo roundtable and further information to follow on our website thank you again gentlemen and have a great great day and good weekend thank you thank you very much thanks right hi everybody enjoyed it