 So, as you know, this is our last roundtable event. Now, we are going to do a sort of group-wide wrap-up after this roundtable, so don't feel like this is the last chance to ask a question or a voice, an opinion, et cetera. So, the last panel is another Science Art and Society panel, our first panel on this topic. We talked about how to overcome elitism in the arts and sciences and better connect with the people. You know, the people are who, you know, look at art and engage with science, and it's important that we repair this kind of broken relationship between science and art, science and society and art and society. We also talked about literacy or lack thereof for the arts and for the sciences, and so, you know, there might be some panelists who want to continue that conversation because I don't think we quite finish it. And we also talked about, you know, how to maintain the integrity of art and science while trying to connect with people who might have different ideas about what we should be studying or what we should be making work about. So, anyways, I am going to plant a seed question as soon as I sit down, but I will let Zach introduce our roundtable panelists. If each panelist could raise their hand as I announce the name, Suzanne Anker. Suzanne is a visual artist and theorist working at the intersection of art and the biological sciences. She works in a variety of mediums ranging from digital sculpture and installations to large scale photography to plants grown by LED lights. Her work has been shown both nationally and internationally in museums and galleries, including the ZKM, Carl Roo Germany, Walker Art Center, the Smithsonian Institute, the Phillips Collection, PS1 Museum, and the JP Getty Museum, to name a few. Daniel Hill. Daniel is an abstract painter and sound artist whose work has been included in numerous exhibitions exploring the relationship between painting, sound, and science. Collections that hold hills paintings include United States embassies, Microsoft Corporation, and the Bank of America. He is currently an adjunct associate professor of art at Pace University in Manhattan. Amelia Ammon. Amelia is a solar designer with an aesthetic approach to integrating sustainable energy into the built environment. Her design company develops products and installations, including a solar awning with architects, solar signage for wayfinding, and dark sky compliant solar LED lights for solar one solutions, and many, many more interesting projects. Amelia is a member of the Collective for Community Culture and the Environment, CCCE, has served as chairman of the board of directors of the Northeast Sustainable Energy Association and is co-founder of the New York Chapter of O2 International Network for Environmentally Concerned Designers. Paul Brody. Paul is a psychiatrist and an encounter-coupled centered couples guide and a storyteller. He co-founded Narrative Inc, a company that transforms individuals, teams, and organizations through the universal art of storytelling. He has led and participated in several projects with the Open Society Foundations, teaching storytelling as an advocacy tool to doctors and grantees from marginalized communities in Africa and Eastern Europe. He has taught in the Narrative Medicine Masters program at Columbia University for the past seven years. Nancy Princeenthal. Nancy is a Brooklyn-based writer whose book Agnes Martin, Her Life in Art, received the 2016 Penn America Award for Biography, a former senior editor of Art in America. She has also contributed to art forum, The Village Voice, and The New York Times. She is taught at the Center for Territorial Studies, Bard College, Princeton University, and Yale University, and is currently on the faculty of the School of Visual Arts. Farzad Mahoudian. Farzad is a clinical associate professor at NYU's College of Arts and Sciences, Faculty of Liberal Studies. His interdisciplinary work focuses on the interactions of metaphor, myth, and science in the context of scientific theory, practice, and history. Recent publications include Metaphor and Chemistry, Jung and Laboratory ethnographies, and Whitehead on Intuition, Implication for Science and Civilization. With that, I think Julia is going to start us out with a question. OK, thank you, Zach. So over the last couple of days, we've been talking about a lot of things, and I'm going to mix some of our subject matters here. So I want to start by asking you all, since I think you'll all have a kind of informed opinion about this from one aspect or another. How can science art collaboration help repair the relationships that we're talking about between art, science, and society? So feel free to approach this question, as you will, but with a focus on art and science working together to do this. I'll start. Hi. Just want to actually have a look at each of the people that I'm talking about. Because I woke up this morning thinking how strange it was to be going to have a conversation, fairly personal conversation, because that's how it feels to me with people I didn't know. And so for me, I find myself in the last couple of days really not knowing whether I belong here. I'm not sure why I'm here and whether I belong. I don't know if I'm a scientist, and I don't know if I'm really an artist. I don't. I don't know if I belong here. And then I thought, well, maybe that's exactly why I belong. Because if I can find a way of feeling that I belong, then we've done our job. And so for me, it's really about how we listen to one another. So most of the work that I'm involved in is looking at the space that exists between people and what occupies that space and what shapes the space and how we can unclatter the space. So when we look at art and science, the question is, what is the space? Is there a space between them? And what can we do to take out whatever obstacles there are for them to coexist? So I realize people ask me, what do you do? What kind of psychiatrist are you? What's your specialty? And I have a really hard time answering, because I grew up in South Africa knowing that I wanted to be an actor. And so I went to medical school. And finished medical school. And when a year out of medical school gave that up and went to drama school in England and became an actor. And my life has been this endless back and forth between am I an artist, am I a guest scientist? Because I am a psychiatrist and I think one of the big struggles of psychiatry has been that it wants so badly to be a science. And I don't believe that it is. I mean, there are aspects to psychiatry which are science. Do you know, do psychopharmacology? But even that is not a science. How you interact with the person in such shapes whether the medications are going to work? So I start with that and I say that what I would love is if this conversation rather than us talking about how we could create generative conversations out there, if we could create one right now right here, that would be great. I don't like what people say. And I think that there are a number of threads here we can pick up on about the antagonisms really between art and science. Scientists like to think that if they are sort of engaged in art practice, it makes their science more humanistic. And for artists, if they are engaged in scientific ideas, it makes their intuitive kind of gestures more palpable to a general audience. But I don't think we're going to solve this problem here. This is an ongoing problem. And it's a problem that may even go back to epistemological issues about knowledge and its production and its measurement. In science, there's consensus. There's consensus based on mathematical kind of rules. They may be bogus, but there is a methodology. There is a scientific method. There is no method in art. Every method is an individual method. It's more or less a dialogue with art history and speaking to the dead. So I think the bigger arches here, not that they can't overlap somewhat, and they do. But trying to put them one on top of another is not in our interest. I mean, some people have talked about a third culture. And I think that's another bad idea. I think there are three people on top of each other, generally better than two. Sometimes. That's who they are. In the spirit of generating conversation, contradictions always a good place to start. Absolutely. So as you contradicted Paul, I'm going to contradict part of what you said. I didn't feel like I contradicted Paul. I just sort of picked out some threads. Well, the scientific method thing part of yesterday, a couple of the panels, some of the scientists said, there's a scientific method. There is no such thing. I think one of them said it's crap. That was the olfactory scientist. But anyway, whether it's crap or it's not there or it's looser than it is. And I think you could probably find a few scientists. I mean, confusing artists with scientists. A few artists who would say that there's a lot of method in what they do, even if they change that method when they get to the next piece. Having said all that, I'm going to contradict myself on top of that. Well, that's OK. I mean, in science, you aim towards repeatability. In art, if you repeat yourself, if someone repeats yourself, then they're either a plagiarist or an appropriationist. So the consensus in art is not based on repeatability. Is there a consensus in art? Yes, of course. I'm going to have to jump in there and say, I have never seen a like Paul. I feel pretty strongly like an imposter in this crowd. When I was hearing my short bio read, I thought, so what's the skin I have in the game here? I've been writing about art for about 30 years. A part that I usually don't put in. My biography is that I've been married to a neuroscience for those 30 years and more. So I've been following very closely the relationship between the arts and the sciences, which has gotten a lot better. 30 years ago, there was very open hostility. So I think one question that hasn't really been addressed that I'd like to introduce at some point is why, historically, culturally, socially has led us to this point of greater intersection than we had 30 years ago when postmodernists were saying, scientists were the enemy. They were searching for absolute truths. Only postmodernists understood that no such thing was attainable at the same time. So I'm going to go with the spirit of contradiction, including self-contradiction. I really firmly believe that what is most fruitful about the sciences and the arts talking to each other is understanding how important the boundaries between them are. This came up yesterday, I think, Stuart Feinstein brought it up. Boundaries are crucial, I think, in our current political climate. We really have reason to understand how ethically important the search for facts are for alternate facts. I'm sorry for facts that are not alternate, that are not. Somebody's hope or somebody's political ambition. So I think on that level where artists and scientists are aimed is fundamentally different. I think artists are disruptors a couple of times over the course of this weekend. Artists have been enlisted in the role of clarifying of making science understandable to everyone, which brings us to the issue of populism, which has also gotten a very complicated politically in the past year. And I think that I guess the biggest difference between, or at least, that's the way it seemed to me over the past few days, between how science and art operate, is that art is fundamentally communicative. It's fundamentally about reaching from inside out. And scientists aren't, that's not a first order of business. Scientists are interested in figuring things out. And so this idea has arisen that artists can then be kind of brought in to take the figuring out and explain it. But the most interesting art I know that reflects ideas from science uses them in a kind of poaching way. You sort of go into somebody else's territory, take what you need, you're not explaining it. You're communicating something entirely else that can't be reduced to words. So I'll stop there. In the spirit of contradiction, I would say that one thing I've picked up from this conference is the similarities between art and science, that if they're both sort of an investigation of the world as we know it, and so little of what we do in school and in society is really talk about the real world, the physical world we live in. And so both art and science are largely self-directed, people choose there, if not specialties, and whatever draws them, the big question that draws them, and then explore it usually in an iterative way. So even if an artist isn't doing the scientific method, they're working through things over and over to get to something that they're trying to say, whether it's in or out or so. I think from that point of view, they're sort of using different tools to get to some sort of reality or some sort of view of the world, that is more in common than a lot of other things that you do. Yeah, I think there is basic epistemological differences. And certainly as far as art being a pedagogical tool for science, I think it's something that's necessary in the world. I think somebody brought up yesterday, 48% of the population in the United States does not believe in evolution. And there are people out there that believe the Earth is flat. So we need as much science and art as possible. Train of thought that came up with something, I think Nancy said. For me, in art school, I found the conceptual underpinning that I wanted to have from my work did not fit in with the postmodern theory that was going on at the time. And I think this is a way that artists can refer to something that is an objective truth. Postmodernism, when I was in school, I couldn't talk about something being beautiful and conceptual at the same time. If it was beautiful, it could not also be smart and have conceptual underpinning. And the conceptual art at the time, I didn't find visually interesting. I find science to be the ultimate conceptual adventure. And so I kind of had to quietly, secretly build a methodology for making work that science was the underpinning to what was going on. But it enables us now to talk about a truth that is true, whether we believe it or not, and whether we know it or not. And I think that's really an important thing. So I have a question for you guys. We're talking about the differences between them and then the similarities. Let's jump on the similarities a bit, or at least the points of convergence where there's a functional, meaningful relationship. And how do we address some of these kind of societal things that we've been talking about, whether it's not as specific as how do we make people believe in evolution through an art science partnership? But this is the meat of what we're talking about here, is how can art and science band together to really do something, to bring us into the future that we envision for ourselves? I think that is being on the scope of essentially our thoughts here, because as I said earlier, this is an age-old kind of discussion. The esteemed art historian, Lee of Steinberg, wrote an article a number of years ago, whether art and science should be linked together. And he brings up Leonardo, of course, who is the master icon in this area. And he said, although Leonardo's scientific discoveries were very important at their time, that even without him, they would have been discovered. But his works of art had to do with the work of the man itself. And I thought that that was some of the most intelligent conversation about this subject. Now, what wasn't mentioned in my introduction is I'm chair of the Fine Arts Department at the School of Visual Arts. And in 2011, I built the first bio-art laboratory in a fine arts department in America. And we have been on the front page of the Wall Street Journal. We've been on community TV. Etc. And the idea here is to use the tools of science to make art. And tools of art also include metaphor. They include irony. They include cultural critique, et cetera. And you're not going to do that in science. OK, so I think that the question of comfortability between disciplines is about territory. And there are many programs that invite artists, and particularly in Europe, to work with scientists. And sometimes they're accepted, and sometimes they're not. Well, we've reversed it. We have now invited scientists to work with artists. And it's the same kind of apprehension that these scientists feel about artists. It's what they come into a bio-art laboratory. They're stunned. It doesn't look like anything that they're familiar with, because it's a cross between the 19th century. Sciences such as live animals, plants, et cetera, and molecular biology. So it's been a subject now that is brewing in many other educational systems, University of Dundee, University of Albany, Windsor University, and Canada, et cetera. So this is a growing phenomenon. And I think education is perhaps one of the key points of this conversion. And I think it's important to recognize that an essential element of the conversion is always going to be technology. And it's about sharing tools. Every medium in art is a technology, painting is a technology, sculptures the technology. Books were a technology that were cutting edge at the time that they were introduced. And that it's at that level, I think, rather than there's been a lot of talk about transdisciplinarity, which I think Suzanne, you and I both are suspicious of. Maybe there's a lot of suspicion around the table about whether or not there's this third way that actually is fruitful and constitutes a path forward. I think to bring the society piece into it, Julia, which maybe we're all a little bit suspicious of, can we do that? Can we change the world? At the same time, points to something that I think is more prevalent now than perhaps once was, which is all of these things have ethical dimensions. So it's something that I think scientists are thinking more about. I think artists are just assuming as part of the project in a way that maybe wasn't true 40 years ago or 50 years ago. Yeah, especially when you consider we're experiencing exponential growth and technology, whether or not we're going to have artificial intelligence in 50 or 100 years is relevant. It's coming, and the moral and ethical implications for that are ambiguous. And because of this advances in technology, it's also we live in an age where I think religion is losing its relevance. And I think that the arts can step up and be the moral conscience of our species. I think it's a duty, in fact. In what way? Critique, we can build a nuclear weapon, we could build artificial intelligence, but should we? And if we're going to build artificial intelligence, what kind? You know, there's a lot of talk about this. I think some people have talked about it. That's going to have a huge implication on society, depending on what type of artificial intelligence we make. It could be a time of human flowering of humanity, or it could be something quite different. And how art is going to fit into that, I think. Art is in a bit of a state of crisis now. And if that's the case now, what will it be when a human-level artificial intelligence can print out an artwork that will fool a human being into thinking another human being made it? And beyond that, find it interesting. And as well as if 3D printing is getting better and better and cheaper and cheaper, we'll be able to print out exact replicas of great master paintings, or even living artists' paintings. Have huge implications on the gallery system. Perhaps galleries wouldn't be necessary in a situation like that. You could just print out a version of the painting and live with it for a while. And if you wanted to buy the real one, you could. It's sort of what happened with the music industry, streaming of music. Art was always different because there was a reproducibility problem. But this would be a big change. It's not enough thought is being given, but there are people who are starting to work on it. Max Tegmark has written a book on it. How to get ready for artificial intelligence when it actually goes to a point where it can, in fact, function better than we can. Which he says will happen very quickly, which is why we need to have the conversation now. I mean, it's been possible to fake paintings and do reproductions of things for a long time. Take you back a moment, could I ask if you are so interested in the boundary between art and science, why build the bio lab? Why build the bio lab? Why paint with acrylics when you had oils? Because it expands the artist's palette. Can you pinpoint enough? I think there's so much going on here. I don't know where to start, so I'll just start with science. The products of science don't last, but those of art last, that's a fantastic distinction that is true and good until we get to AI where you can reproduce it. That messes some things up and brings chaos in an interesting way. But fundamentally, the products of science shouldn't last. Could there be ironic science the way there is ironic art? That would be interesting to see. I think in the long run, historically, it is ironic because it does contradict itself. Well, there's also junk science. And there's junk science, yeah. I mean, a lot of the stuff in a lot of the journals is just a way to pad things, and that's junk, and even if it's true. But there are things that what's interesting about science is that the itself-correcting nature is able to cast out what it felt was true and beautiful and move on. And that's great, and that's to its benefit. We don't have to throw out Leonardo's artwork ever. That's a real clear distinction, I think it's important and absolutely true. So what do we learn from that is part of the question of the boundary, I think. There's clear boundary on that point. So taking a scientific point of view on this, when you set up an experiment, you have to really make sure the boundary conditions are tight so that you know that the results you got are because of this. And if you did all the boundary conditions, you get other results from the same sort of experimental setup. And that kind of thing is basically improvisation. And Andrew Pickring writes about this, the mangle of practice. It's basically, you do one experiment. It's not coming out exactly. The results are not exactly what you thought. So you can did all the boundary conditions, or you can do your theory. And keep basically messing around with both until you're not breaking the instrument totally, but you're modifying it and you're stretching it to its limit. And you're not totally breaking the theory either. You might. You don't care. You can do that too. That sounds exactly like art. Methodically speaking, you're willing to take risks, do improvisation. You don't know exactly where you're going. You're pleased with whatever might come out of it's useful to you if it's fun. And in that way, they're, again, a lot alike because of how they're playing with boundaries. In both cases, you have to know what the boundaries are very tightly in the case of science much more tightly. But in the case of art, too, you created an effect. You kind of want to know how you did that. You don't have to go down to the micron, but it's good to know. So there's a lot of similarity there in the spirit of the improv. And so then that brings me to the social part. And this is the part that's really crazy because the current administration is playing fast and free with facts. They are improving the shit out of the political context, international context. And how is that different from art and science? They've taken the stuff that we teach in colleges about how, well, it's interpretation. And you can really alter the boundary conditions, all the stuff I just said. You can use that to create absolute bullshit. So what is the difference between being rhetorical and improvisational with your facts and your method of creating facts? And what seems to be happening now, I'll suggest one thing that I'm interested in hearing what you think the difference is. They're just doing it for maintaining power and money where it should be, territory. If you don't do that, then you're in an other territory. You're doing other stuff. And I think that's where the sublime and transcendent nature of art and science goes to not just keeping more power and money, but to discovery. Other than that, it seems a lot alike. It seems like... Well, I think this is a huge area of concern and complication. The legacy of prioritizing improvisation and prioritizing flexible thinking and acceptance of contingency, all that stuff. I think one important or useful distinction is between cynicism and irony. To know that you're being deceptive and to go ahead with it anyway is very different than being open to a range of interpretations of a dataset, whether it's in the arts or in the sciences. Also an aesthetic component. What they're doing is so ugly. I mean, it's as age people. I think both science and art are the truth and beauty thing that we're trying to look for something deeper. I mean, is it a matter of motive? So is it a matter of what purpose is being used for? And is it art? Is it science? When I hear that there is a distinction, so epistemologically, they're different systems. But when it becomes an identity that you start saying, I am an artist, he is a scientist. What concerns me is then we become, we stop being able to really see the other because we have so many assumptions about what it is to be an artist, what it is to be a scientist. There are limits, our capacity to be, just to be. And so I'm thinking as we're having this conversation, I'm thinking, is this conversation a scientific conversation or an artistic conversation? Is it either? Because if it's an artistic conversation, then anything is possible in the conversation. That's the way I feel about it. That's how it occurs to me. It's a scientific conversation. What happens for me is that I think there are experts. There are experts and I'm not one of them. I should leave it to the experts to talk about. And I think that's harmful, I think that gets in the way of a generative conversation. So for me, contextualizing this as an artistic conversation gives me freedom to just to belong, to feel like whatever anybody is saying will add and build something. So I'm interested to know how you relate to this conversation for yourselves. Is it artist? Is it scientist? I think in relation to that, I think we need experts. But then there are experts that connect the dots. Gregory Bates talks about the pattern that connects. And finding similarities between these experts and connecting in a way that's interesting. We've divided things for so long and we've found success with that. But there is value in connecting, I might think. Interesting. I come from two fields. One is narrative therapy and the other is narrative medicine. And both of them essentially believe that the person who's consulting the doctor or the therapist is the expert. They're the expert in their own lives. And that does not mean that the practitioner hasn't got a particular scientific or therapeutic expertise that is necessary, but it really is a shift in the power relationship. There's Brian Eno, who's known as a musician. He also has an interesting idea. He's also a great collaborator. He has this notion that he calls cenius, where we live in a society that's obsessed with the individual achievements, the genius. And we almost have a cult of ego. And I think we need to move past that. And he talks about we may obsess over Picasso or something like that. We don't really look at the scene that he came from. It's an ecology of ideas, a conversation about ideas that forms the ground from which a person like that can emerge. I think we've obsessed so much on the individuals that we need to think about the entire ecology. I was thinking about that just today, too, that a lot of the examples of SciArt successes are these rock stars. And they're great. And they just like, just bam. And then there's everybody else. And so with reference to society, again, how many of these geniuses can we spread around? A similar conversation in history of science, too. We pick these heroes. And then there's all this other stuff going on, legions of people doing. But we only have a very small handful of names. So in reference to society, how can we basically what we want to do? I think it sounds like we want science to be more widespread. We want art to be more widespread. Generally, that would be good regardless of how. Although we don't want to turn art into a propaganda tool for science because science keeps changing. It's like monkeys out of artists and scientists to be really good at propagandizing today's science. That's happened so many times already. So instead, what do we do if we could harness the power of many ordinary individuals, which we are mostly, through a generative process? So this is the idea for a SciArt project that doesn't involve too many geniuses, but it involves lots of non-geniuses. It's going to be a disaster. Chaos is generative, too. So it would be something like this. You have some large scale, literally, I'm talking scale now, large scale in space and time thing that you want to, what do you call it? It's not an exhibit, it's not going to be any museum, but event, or maybe you want it to last. Maybe it's a mural that covers several square miles or something. And then the bits of it are going to be done by individual people. There's things like this before. I don't know the examples of it, but it's through some kind of combinatorial analysis too that you can do this. It's not just you're going to make a grid and you guys are going to be responsible for these things, so hold up the blue plaque. It's more like the improv element comes in. It's more like, okay, there's a problem. You all have to solve it. Here's your boundary. You solve your problem in here when I say go. And so they're all going to be solving. It's like parallel processing. That's what I'm trying to say. Instead of serial processing in the computer, a lot of people are solving the same problem at the same time, in the same area. They don't know exactly what they're going to get when they hook up. But it's done by a bunch of small, slow processors. This is like when you hook up a bunch of little computers, 256 of them in a big array, you can do a lot of great things that a supercomputer can do where you take a bunch of really low res lenses and you wire them together in an array like a dragonfly. You get very high res, comparable to it. So this is getting a bunch of low res people, non-geniuses, something that they understand in their locality and then the product is something that's great, even though individually. And then sort of some way that's happening. I mean to go back to Paul's, this is a very good question. Is this a, I'm going to be thinking about that for a while. Is this a science conversation or an art conversation? I think one of the things that has fostered a better relationship between the arts and sciences is the trend in the arts toward collaborative and participatory work. I mean that's something that's been on the rise. For decades now and I'm thinking in terms of this idea of lots of low res people, none of us are going to identify ourselves as those, lots of low res people. There is work that sort of enacts that. I'm thinking of Tino Segal, although he's just one artist who's done that kind of participatory work where you know he had to show it that some people here are familiar with his work. He had to show the Guggenheim that was about having his collaborators stage conversations with visitors to the museum. They were scripted. He walked into the museum. He did this also in galleries and other places around the world. And the conversations that took place were the art. And they were scripted in the beginning. But then after that it was, you know, it was a real time, real life conversation. So that is a kind of artwork that sits on this boundary. As do a lot of more sort of conventionally definable collaborations between artists and scientists. I'd like to pick up on collaborations in the visual arts. And there are some. And there are more now coming. I agree with you. But artists, visual artists are not great collaborators. They're not going to sit there and take instruction about, you know, from geniuses or non-geniuses. It just doesn't happen that way. But I do want to bring this back to society because I think that's the triangulation that we need to concentrate on rather than the dyadic structure, art versus or art and science, et cetera. In 2004, I wrote this book called The Molecular Gays, Art in the Genetic Age, published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, which is an august scientific institution. It's the first time they produced an art book. It's a collaboration with the late Dorothy Nelkin, who was a sociologist of science. And unfortunately, she died before the book came out. But when we teamed up together and I said to her for every sociological aspect of science, you can come up with, I will come up with a visual constituent image. So there is a certain kind of possibility here of not essentially patronizing scientific companies or whatever, but really looking at the data bank in art history of how people were thinking about some of the things that are prevalent in society now, such as genetic engineering. Now, this is very similar to the concept of collage or cut and paste techniques. This goes back to 3000 BC. So it's not a question that this is all new. It's not new. It has this kind of creeping build up that includes innovation, includes accident, includes recognition. Last time I was here and I was on a panel with you, Galasi was here and Barbara Stafford and several others who quite a high res group, I must say. And Galasi is the scientist who discovered mirror neurons by accident. So that is one of the things I think is part of discovery that may join these two forces, but it's about recognition of the accident and being able to extrapolate it. And the reason I went into design originally was that I was interested in art and interested in science and it seemed to me that design was the combination of the two. So therefore, the perfect thing, but then you have designed somewhat subservience to commerce, that you're making a living, you're doing propaganda in some ways. And that's why when started thinking about the environment and we have to change our whole energy system, what's a new energy system going to look like? Or how is it going to be better than the hodgepodge we have now? So I guess I think there are ways that art and science can impact the future, whether it's having something to say about AI or energy systems or where we're going. I think actually looking forward in the future, I think design and architecture really have high possibility of blurring the line between fine art and science. I was, we were in a symposium last month called Strange Attractors and I spoke to some scientists there that felt that neuroscience or neuro-aesthetics is, there's nothing to it that, you know, it doesn't have real science behind it yet, but with three decades plus of making art under my belt and the subjective experience of that, I think personally I can say absolutely my thinking and my creative problem solving skills have been enhanced by both the product that I have made and the process of making it. And when we think about the architecture that we have around us being dictated by profit and margins and costs, where if we could study further neural-aesthetics and find the pattern, I think it was in the newest book by Max Tegmark, he says, you know, it's not matter that matters, it's the pattern, it's the structure that gives intelligence. And if we can extrapolate from that structure that we can surround ourselves in our civic design and architecture, you know, we could build a city, an urban design, an interior design that could potentially have a small part in making us better thinkers and problems. architecture and building has been often a joint venture all along. Yeah, if you want to go back to Plato with that too, if I just design the ideal republic, then the citizens will naturally be good. That's the idea, right? And if we add science to that and get some really good artists, not push the poets out, but bring them back in to work with the scientists, then we can make this ideal republic that not only is designed well but also produces. The only thing that, and he was being kind of ironic and metaphorical all that, and we should take him as that when he pushed the poets out, but I think it points up one really good thing that I think Plato does express very well. Collaboration's not enough. If we get really good at science art collaboration, we could still do some really heinous things that look beautiful. I mean, intelligence by itself is not enough. We can do some horrific things with better intelligence and make it palatable with art. So it leaves the moral component that many people brought up the other day about how what are the social values, where social justice, how does that work into this picture? And there we don't want of all places to be elitist in the sense that, well, we'll design the size of the room and door and window for you, and we'll also decide for you, what are the best moral values for you and you're all so much alike and all that? So that can't be done. So how do we do it? Instead, it goes back to the ground layer of working, listening to each community and letting those values come from them. In other words, trusting its chaotic again, but trusting in the sub-low res, whatever community, which already has pride of place as the person who mentioned Appalachia the other day yesterday, people have pride of their, they know their place, they know their land and they know that community many generations. They're in the best position to express something beautiful about it artistically as well as other values as well as knowing what the problems there are. So applying just raw intelligence to what we think are the main problems of some part of West Virginia, not the best way to go, but the participatory research stuff that you mentioned, that's the way. And when you do that, you can add to that participatory art as well as participatory science as well as participatory social value and social justice. So you're listening more and letting it come up and really all you're doing is creating the context. Is this an art adventure, is this a science adventure, is this a government adventure? Well, no, we're just going to set up a context, not sure what to call it, but then it'll be something the community can define as it goes and redefine and redefine and redefine as it goes. And from that will emerge something better than a top-down design that's done by intelligent people, which fails utterly. Yeah, well, you now have do-it-yourself bio labs internationally. In New York, it's GenSpace and Bioacres Without Borders. And this sort of theme is an expansion of what computer hacking was in the 90s to now engage in hacking biology. And the general public is invited in to take very short courses in whether it's genetic engineering or cloning or painting with bacteria, et cetera. And this is a very interesting construct because if you look at the do-it-yourself bio community, you'll see it's almost in every country in the world. I don't know what the repercussions are going to be with this. Alan Jorgensen, who's one of the founders of GenSpace, and comes in as an invited scientist to do my lab, is also friends with the FBI, okay? That's so many times. Friends, right. How do you do that? Well, they were very taken by her. And she has never received any intrusive kinds of arrests. She knows it. She's a PhD in molecular biology. She's a member of TED. And this is sort of her forte is to bring science to the community, from children to adults to even scientists who do not have an institutional affiliation. By doing science at home, I mean, you need a lot of equipment. So I think we need to fold that into this conversation as a fact that science has spilled out of the laboratory into our everyday lives in many ways, and to articulate some of those things from the clothes we wear to the food we eat to the medicine we take, et cetera, et cetera, that this is a revolution in the transformation of materials, human materials, animal materials, the sale of materials, blah, blah, blah. And this has been going on since the late 80s. So I think those are some of the areas that people could be engaged with when they go to the supermarket and their food is not labeled as a GMO, and that's another thing we do in our lab is we do GMO testing. So we get to see what's what. And so, for example, when you're on delta airlines, don't eat the cookies. And other things like that that are GMOs, whatever that means. I mean, that's a whole conversation for the social order that people are hidden. I mean, that people are hidden, but products are hidden in terms of what they consist of. Okay. It's interesting to me that you say people are hidden. People are hidden too. Some of the more rewarding work that I've done in the last several years has been working with people who are marginalized for some reason and who are trying to, a part of movements, trying to change the narrative around them, around who they are. And they resort to pseudo-scientific language, trying to explain to people, for example, an example would be people in Croatia with intellectual disabilities are often institutionalized from birth. For a whole lot of psychosocial reasons, there aren't enough resources that people are put in these draconian institutions and never see the light of day are very poorly treated. So there is a movement to de-institutionize people and reintegrate them into the community. And so there was a whole body of knowledge trying to teach people that people with intellectual disabilities deserve to live in the world. They don't need to be locked away. But with opinion, what you get is opinion. So when you say, when you try and bring facts to people and say, if people don't belong in institutions, people say, but they do. And it becomes an argument. So we were hired to come in and work with an organization of people with intellectual disabilities, training them to tell their personal stories and they're not stories about living in institutions. They're ordinary stories about living in the world. And just so in order to be accepted into this organization, I needed to speak about my credentials. So I had been told before I went to Croatia that I should speak about my credentials as a doctor, as a psychiatrist, and I should definitely not mention my own personal story, which is if you go Google me, you'll find out that most of my work has been around my own personal journey about being a gay man living with HIV and that my storytelling was a way of before there was the science of surviving, really, of finding a way of making sense of my experience as a person with HIV. I was told, do not mention this in Croatia because no one will listen to you. So I arrived at the organization and they said, welcome, we will not introduce you to the people you're going to work with yet. They're a vulnerable group till we feel safe with you. Who are you? I said, well, I'm a psychiatrist. I don't even mention that word because in institutions the psychiatrists were the people that participated terrible harm on the people in institutions. They said, can you tell us something personal about yourself? And I said, well, I like to hike. And first of all, it got more and more difficult until the simple in my performance partners was another whole story of a 20-year collaboration with someone, which is not easy, I can tell you, really collaborating. But he said to me, listen, if we don't speak the truth, we're not going to get to work with these people. So I told my story and the social workers who were the interface with the organization ended up in tears and saying, well, that's why you're here. Come on in. And so what we did was teach people who really some didn't have language, some were beyond terrified to sit in front of a group. We eventually taught them to sing and to tell stories about very simple stories. One woman told the story of her niece and she showed a picture of how much she loves that little girl, plays with her in the park. She's a woman with dance syndrome. And they then used these stories as part of a campaign that is you can find as part of their organization. And it was the art. It was the art of storytelling, it was one of the women couldn't speak at all. She just danced. It was the art that communicated what this, I would say the science couldn't have. And honoring those people as experts. So I think what you're saying is allowing it to come from the people, what it is that's needed, is a particular kind of consciousness that we can bring as artists and as scientists. I think that is a really good point to pause at and invite the audience up for questions. I'm going to emphasize again, people come up for questions. Please ask questions for this panel because we're going to do an open group session where it's going to be more like pass around the mic, talk about your reflections for a minute or two and what you want to see next and that sort of thing. So more commentary things we can save for a little bit later. But let's get some questions going. Can I just say to your point that we throw out science and keep art? I mean Newtonian physics works really well for most of the world. Darwinian evolution. There are some things that we build on. I was going to say something very similar. I'll expand on that a little bit on this notion that science is always discarding itself. Whereas we keep Leonardo, but we don't keep all scientific ideas. It's not quite true. It's true that science is in an important sense self-correcting. But it's not disposable in the sense that whatever version of the truth we have at any one moment is path dependent and knowing that path is very important. We need to understand Aristotle's cosmology and what was wrong with it and what we learned about the universe that made us realize that that was limited. Like you just said, we need to understand Newton's laws. In fact, we can't teach science without teaching Newton's laws. And then we teach why they don't quite apply fully because of what we've learned since then. We teach science and to know science without knowing that history of ideas that are wrong. I mean in a certain sense limited. And so maybe keeping Newton and keeping Aristotle is not that different from keeping Leonardo. You don't teach artists. I mean artists have to learn about Leonardo, but you don't teach a professional artist now. Go out and make art exactly like Leonardo. Any more than we teach, go out and do Aristotle's cosmology. As I understand, art, which is not fully, there are also movements and things that, you know, ways that are things are done and you don't go out and do art the way it was done 20 years ago. So there is that sort of revision too. It's not quite the same sort of linearity. But maybe there's a little more commonality there than was represented. The other quick point I wanted to make was about this notion of not having everything just done by geniuses. I thought it was a very interesting part of the conversation. And there is this question of who owns art and who owns science? Who's it for? Is art just for professional artists in art departments or is it for everybody? And we can ask the very powerful thing about science. And so this notion of having projects that everyone can do and you were kind of crowd sourcing and all that, you were kind of feeling it. There's a really good model in science now for citizen science where there are these projects where it's not just because it's cool as an outreach thing to involve people. In fact, the science is better. There are certain kinds of science where having lots of people out there recording and sensing and contributing gives us an ability to do kinds of science that we couldn't do when it's just the genius. And so the idea, and you mentioned a project at a museum that maybe kind of hinted at this too, but the idea of sort of citizen side art where we use some of these same platforms to really be collaborative in some way that it's not about the genius vision of the great ego, but the contribution of the masses. And maybe there's a way that the citizen science model can be further applied to side art. And also, I mean, in that language, the maker movement, which is something that's going on where, and you mentioned these bio labs, just kind of like that where you really are bringing in lots of people. And it's not just about the lone genius vision, but like getting people involved. So I think that's a very useful direction we can think of in this conversation. As far as Leonardo, I'm reading the new biography by Isaacson. And it's maybe, you know, the thought that I had was not that we should paint like him, but we should think like him. He was an integrator and brought disparate things together. And I think that's where his real inspiration is. Mr. Foden question. I was asked yesterday by this gentleman to say some of my artwork out there. I noticed the ongoing difficulty we have with correlating art and science, et cetera. I was fortunate enough to, when I flashed paint and mixed paint with other paint, et cetera, et cetera, to discover the formation process of the vertebrae, et cetera, et cetera. Those are out there and I would like you to give me some feedback as to if you can agree to that. I mean, I just think I discovered the formation process reverted by an other important like horseshoe crab splashes, exactly. They established the fact that the physics of liquid formation correlates to biological formation processes. And yeah, give me some feedback if you would. Please, I'll be here. Thank you. Thank you. I just want to say you had a lot there. I didn't want to gloss over the value of art, which probably you have a whole conference on that question alone. But I think something I've been thinking about a lot is that we emphasize the product that is art, the noun of art. But I think we should emphasize and put as much value, perhaps an education on the verb of art, the process of art, the thinking that is art. But again, that's a loaded conversation. No, no. So thank you all for your wonderful thoughts today and on other days. I had, I guess, two questions related to authorship, which I think came up a lot in this discussion and it was part of the first question. Even as kind of the model of authorship in sciences versus arts, I think in science publications, there's a long history of many authors being on the publication. And less so with humanities and artists, although we have fields within the arts that know how to credit many people, theatrical performances, the film industry, animations, there are hundreds of people listed as producers in a larger work. And I'm wondering whether these kind of considerations of authorship might also affect how we think about science, art production and collaboration and whether changing our models for authorship when we have a participatory piece, we're actually crediting the low res people in that piece and not just saying, oh, this is a Nick Cave sound piece that happened to be sown by 100 people found on Craigslist or whatever. So one is this question of authorship. I'm curious about your thoughts about changing models of authorship within the fields of art science and art science and psi art, whatever. The other is a question about, in particular, participatory art. And you kind of put forward this model of the grand mural with small components fabricated or designed by other people and we have this idea of seenness, which as opposed to genius, which I thought was very interesting. And I think there's another interesting strand that I would be curious for the group to comment on, which is sort of trends in evolutionary art where the participant is part of the aesthetic where I think one of the kind of standard examples, we have electric sheep where people are voting on the aesthetic direction of a digital artwork and there's genetic algorithms involved in its production. Another interesting example is comar and melamine who kind of say, you know, this has some problems to it. When we ask everybody to participate and vote, you get something that's pretty dreadful and everything that we get. But that's painting of every country that is a landscape and it has George Washington in the corner and kind of like a deer on the side and everybody is happy. But the end result is something that is not all that satisfactory. And so I guess the second question is in this question of authorship intersecting with the people or the public or the low res people, whatever you want to call it, how do you also preserve this aspect of novelty search that is so important in art making and finding outliers, you know, artistic visions that do not come about through a democratic process. That is such an important question. I mean, two questions, three questions, many questions. And I'm glad you brought comar and melamine into the discussion. I'm sure most people in this room know about this series of town hall meetings they had where they would ask the attendees to vote on elements that should be in the best picture and they varied according to region of course. But there's always a lot of blue because blue is everyone's favorite color. It's like an extraction to people like landscapes. So there's all. So, you know, on the one hand, you know, I think it's really important that people who are involved in the creation of artwork be credited. This has resulted in a lot of wives being acknowledged as co-authors of work that used to be attributed only to their husbands. You know, we're looking at the Keene Holtz and Christo and Klaus Haldenburg and missing a lot of people. But so these are, you know, these are good things happening. There are artists who acknowledge their assistance very explicitly. There are artists who don't. On the other hand, and I think this is really important and I'm not going to be proposing a hard and fast rule here, there is tremendous danger in, I think, seeding the initiative for producing the work to the public. And I think it's suspect because it's, you know, it's a way that institutions have boosted their audience, you know, this sort of drive toward everyone's a winner, everyone's an artist, everyone's a participant. You know, your expertise is as valuable as mine and it's particularly prevalent in the arts because really everyone does feel in their hearts of hearts that they're artists. Why not? What do you need to be an artist? Not much, just an opinion, right? I think being clear about negotiating those two, you know, kind of irresolvable perspectives is really important. I'm not sure who it was. It might have been Thomas Jefferson that said democracy only works with that educated public. And saying it's true with the status of art education in this country, we can't expect people to know how. I mean, there are certain basic teaching that needs to happen. And as far as authorship, I think if there's a matter of prioritization, if we have a priority more on the product and what the product is, the thing and the product as the thinking, what it is doing for us, there'll be less of a need to want to have authorship. I don't know, I think it's important, but I think the focus should be on what it is and what it's doing. Yeah, I have two comments. One, one, distance on the wall under his name. But let's take this expression, everyone's an art critic. I don't know much about art, but I know what I like. What if I go into a scientific laboratory? And I say, I don't know much about science, but I know what I like. And that's what's happening. I know what facts I like. I use that as a segue for my question. So I wanted to ask a question based on Farzad's parallel processing question. And whenever I come to some of these conferences as a guest or whichever on this side or this side, I always wonder how can we harness the power of the people in the room? And so you're talking about science and science in society. This is a micro-society. And we often, and these are great conversations to listen to and be part of. But I wonder how can we also use our experimental processes that we're going through finding out how to collaborate and how to collaborate in these new ways that are not genius-centered, that are about looking at other people and listening to them and taking time and doing things in parallel and then coming back together. And so I'm curious, just in terms of having you as a smaller group, iterate about the next panel in terms of like where or not panel. The collective discussion is where do we go as a community? Are we a community? And do we have processes that we can start to put into place so that we always make sure that even if we don't harness the power of the room today, we leave the room knowing that the power of the room is going to be, that there are processes in place, whether they be online, offline, about meeting at the next cafe, next week or whatever. I'm just curious to have you play with that. I think that's a great suggestion for the final panel, for the structure of the final panel to do that. And can you figure that out between now and then? It reminds me of in family therapy, there used to be, well, there still is in some context, a one-way mirror in which the expert sat on the one side and watched the family working with the therapist, there was a phone and the experts would call in and the therapist would pick up the phone with the family sitting there and go, okay. Thank you, and say they want to know why you're so angry or whatever it is. It sets up the unknown invisible experts. I think his name was Tom in 1987, decided to do away with the one-way mirror and he took down the mirror so that now the people could see the experts and it changed everything because behind those one-way mirrors, people would say things to each other about the family that the family would never hear. Suddenly, anything that God said was heard and that became known as a reflecting team. And what it did was it broke down the power relationship. So I think the question is really important. I think that what can happen here is even when you're having questions directed at us, we become somewhat, we are the experts in the room and everybody else is an outsider, witness group really. If we don't turn, if we all shut up and listen to reflections from the room that don't necessarily have anything to do directly with what we've spoken, we would get a whole other body of knowledge that would arise and then it would end with us reflecting on what we'd heard. And that's a standard practice in narrative therapy using communities and then outsider witness groups and then reflection. I think that's a wonderful way to go. Well, clearly I should have just asked you to introduce the last, you know, collective session because that is exactly the idea. There's not going to, when we meet again in 20 minutes or whatever, there aren't going to be people sitting in the middle. It's just going to be kind of, you know, as we are and the thoughts that we can squeeze in, you know, in the time that we have, which will continue. And there are a lot of ideas floating around which we'll discuss a little bit later about how to continue this online offline in person over there over here sort of take yours. So I want to give a little contribution to this therapy session. I actually, I'm a long term collaborator with Tala Volk. I'm a scientist. I'm retired, but I'm still active and I always crash at his apartment and makes it very convenient. So he invited me here. I came Friday night. My name's David Schwartzman, by the way. And I want to start with a quotation, which I don't know if it's been used yet because I wasn't here yesterday. Art is not a mirror of reality, but a hammer with which to shape it. And that's attributed to Bertolt Breck, but there's some controversy whether it's Mayakovsky or whatever. But what it brings up is art as a technology. And I think that the technology part has been alluded to, but it's the intersection of art technology and science, I think is really critical. So yes, art is a mode, there's a mode of production technology to make art. But art itself is a technology like a million's design, so a design. And obviously architecture and so on. So it's technology, but it's also, and let me make a quick point about the conflation of science and technology. If you're critical of GMO, then you're anti-science. You've heard that. If you're critical of a technology which appropriates molecular biology, then you are immediately out by those in that, let's say, business, your attack as being anti-science. And I was very influenced by Lewis Althuss's philosophy works, in particular, brought as a mode of aesthetic production, which I think some of his followers already also wrote about. And not only brings in the mode of production of making art, but how art interfaces with social movements. The Swat Sticker is an obvious example of a fascist aesthetic, which had a powerful, I think it had a real powerful influence in empowering the fascist movement, that symbol, which of course was appropriated from India or in the Navajos, whatever. But I would share with you two a more positive example. I, as a scientist, I went to the science march. And of course, I'm a climate justice activist and all the rest. But there was science saying science has brought us the cell phone and a cures for, I don't penicillin or whatever. No one held up the science saying science brought us nuclear weapons. So the, what I pose, I guess there's a question here, what I'm posing is the great potential of art being a part of progressive social movements to change the world. Going back to Brex quotation. I'll sort of make a comment to that. Well, art is a way to engage in the cultural imaginary. And if we go back to Aristotle, he talks about the poetic epistemag, which is the role of images, objects, words, et cetera, to essentially get towards that. That it's the idea that is expressed through this materialization. And the influence of art as an icon within social practice is a thesis in itself. We can take it on both sides. Another image that the Nabam, young girl running naked with burnt body from Vietnam or the Abu Ghraib images or Michael Jackson. These are icons that then carry with them huge social dimensions. And that's in many ways what an icon does, whether we go back to Russian Orthodox religion, et cetera, that it encapsulates all of the social surround. And it has not changed. Yeah, and art also could be a simulation for the full spectrum of the human experience. Science is mostly objective, but there's this huge subjective part of us, motions. And art can be a stage in which we can put these things together and run a simulation. I think that's another valuable way to think of it. My name is Cynthia Panucci. So I founded art and science collaborations here in New York 30 years ago. And I've watched the field slowly develop over these years. After being an art student and coming to New York to start my art career in the early 70s, I worked in the top print gallery in New York. The AAA gallery doesn't exist anymore. But I saw the elitism of the art world. And then I see my family members who mostly they're not artists, and people that I know, galleries are incredibly off-putting to the common person, the common man. So science, yesterday I said we have to sort of sneak in science and surprise people with it because you mentioned the word and people turn off their eyes glaze over. So I think that the people in this room, we represent a really privileged, rarefied environment. And I just went to Thanksgiving with my family in relatives. And I cannot talk about my work because there's no talking about, they feel they're not experts. And they feel because I've been in this field for x-men years, maybe I'm somewhat of an expert anyway. I like the ideas of crowdsourcing information and citizen science because it's sort of a natural way to bring people into the issues that we're all really concerned with, I think, in this world. We want to make the world a better place to live, one that's environmentally sustainable for future generations. And we have the privilege of thinking about the implications of AI or genetic engineering. Most of the people in my family and the people on the common man, they come home, this is how my brother explained it years ago, we come home, we have three children, we do dinner dishes, we make their sandwiches. We do their homework with them, we read stories to them, we're exhausted, we go to bed. We have hybrid minds. I think we have a responsibility to our society, to put our energies together and to work on some of the very, what do they call the complex problems of our time, the stubborn issues. What is that term? The wicked problems. Anyway, it's sort of for the next rooms panel, but it sort of addresses the crowdsourcing information, the elitism. Thinking that the local person, like an Appalachia, wherever, or my brother lives in Michigan and there are invasive species going into Lake Michigan, and that's why the water is crystal clear, you can drink it practically, it's beautiful, it cannot sustain life. And the fishing where tourists like to come and fish, it's seeded by the forestry biology department at University of Michigan, they put the fish in there every year. I mean, what type of environment do we want to live in, a totally artificial environment? But we are the kind of hybrid minds that can be the visionaries, the leaders, and I'm not meaning to be elitist. I think we have to listen to the problems, but the people in Michigan or Wisconsin, the whole border, Chicago area, they're not thinking about this in the future, what it's going to mean for the tourist industry and for just enjoying the lake. I think that is a great place to end and is kind of giving us the impetus to not let this fizz out as things so often do after conferences. Okay, so we're going to have our last artistic interlude of the weekend, we're going to hear from Dr. Shirley Mueller, who is a neuroscientist, but we're going to hear how neuroscience can interact with museum exhibition, which is a kind of new trend I see happening around, especially at places like Peabody Essex Museum in Massachusetts. So we're going to watch a short video, we'll take a break, reconvene for the wrap up. Okay, we got through. We have a fun chair dance turn around and thank you panelists for a wonderful panelist morning. I was still mic'd. If we could get the lights turned down a little bit on this side, it's perfect. No, I would recommend a phone, I'll have to stick the bill back in next year now.