 Coming. I guess you know we're the amygdalaids and we play music about mind and brain and mental disorders. So it's fitting that we're in this particular place tonight. And the program is we're going to play a few songs and play about 45 minutes, 50 minutes or so. But before each sort of suite of songs, which would be one or two songs together on a particular topic, I'll just give you a brief kind of background about the intellectual background of the topic, the historical kind of place that the ideas come from, that the song is sort of based upon. And we're going to start off with a couple of songs about one of the deep problems in psychology, philosophy, neuroscience, psychiatry, all of the things that we know and care about, which is the mind-body problem. And you know this goes back to the ancient Greeks. We have ideas from the article at Delphi, for example, that the article said know thyself and a couple of millennia later, Descartes tried to solve this problem by concluding that the only thing he could know was himself with certainty. But you know this becomes, with Freud this becomes more questionable because then we have some issues about how much of what we are is conscious and how much is unconscious. So a couple of themes will be explored tonight through the music is consciousness and unconsciousness and the automaticity of certain aspects of who we are. And we're going to start with a couple of songs that are more in the area of consciousness, in particular with the first one is sort of a tribute to Descartes and he goes like this. I think so I am, I feel so I must be, sometimes I don't know, but it is to be me, I see your eyes, and they're staring at me, they're sharp as knives, oh what do we see, you can't see, you can't see inside of me, inside of me there's a blade only I can be. My soul has passion, it's trying to feel, searching for desire, nothing is real, my will is weak, it's not very free, nothing to get hung about, oh that's just the deal, you can't see inside of me, inside of me, that's a place only I can be, you can't see inside of me, inside of me that's a place only I can be. I think so I am, I feel so I must be, sometimes I don't know, it's to be me, I think so I am, I feel so I must be, sometimes I don't know, but it is to be me, you can't see, you can't see inside of me, inside of me that's a place only I can be. All right, thank you very much. Tyler, you'd say something for a minute while I switch guitars. Well, about the mind-body problem. Yes, what's the next song, Joe? I forgot. Mind-over-matter. Oh, mind-over-matter. So, yeah, yeah, we have to, well, of course, in culture, we think we have a lot of control over matter, and we do in a certain sort of way. But there's always a longing for more and more transcendence. We think of ourselves as immaterial beings as the same times that we're materially embodied and so this next song is a little bit about the, that kind of conflict between the material and the immaterial. Yeah, and it's about the, you know, the longing that you can have for someone who's not here and sort of delude yourself into thinking you can overcome space and time and bring that person together with you. Mind-over-matter. If I write down space and time. Mind over matter Something I'm trying to do Break down space and time Be together with you I'm trying to will you hear Mind you wherever you are Locate your body or soul Pull you in from afar Are you still in my time? Have you slipped away? Have you gone forward to back Living in another day? Where am I to be? Different content and her on the scene In the air Blind and free In a place Heavenly Whoever you are now Use my mind to find No mound of space or time Keep you from being mine In the air Mind over matter Something I'm trying to do I guess it's only physics It keeps me apart from you Mind over matter Something I'm trying to do Break down space and time Break down space and time Be together with you Be together with you Be together with you Be together with you Be together with you Thank you Now we're going to switch gears to The unconscious mind We're going to do a couple of songs About how we aren't always quite aware of what's driving our behavior Deep below the surface This is a song by Tyler And I want you to tell us a bit about it This song is about the way the mind travels by itself On its own journey You can not have any Stimulus I think I'm thinking But thinking is thinking me This is an ongoing meditation for me The song is called The automatic mind Right now it's the automatic mind It's got an interesting Bass part here Welcome to the automatic mind The door is open to remembered time Images are conjured like a dream Guiding actions on the waking screen Even though I realize it's still I feel so blind As I think about And can't live without the automatic mind We live in the automatic mind Introspection opens in her eyes It seems advanced yet hardly in control Illusion of the will is comfort cold Even though I realize it's still I feel so blind As I think about And can't live without the automatic mind Walk, talk, blank, drink, think You think, you think, you think You think, you think, you think, you think Thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you. Even though I realize it's still I feel so blind as I think about and can't live without automatic mind. Tyler, well, all right, so let me just take that opportunity to introduce Tyler Tyler and I'm a professor of environmental sciences and biology at NYU and he works on atmospheric issues and carbon and things like that, anything else you want to add about that? That sounds good, Joe. Okay, and Daniela Schiller is an assistant professor at Mount Sinai. She's a cognitive neuroscientist and she studies recovery from fear and processes in the brain that allow people to get over fears through various ways, anything else? Yeah, no, that's very good. And she's also an award-winning storyteller for the Moth organization and other places. Amanda Thorpe is a world-famous international musician. She hails from Derby, England, Darby, I guess it's a doggy. All right, and we're very fortunate to have her with us. Although she's not technically a scientist, she does have a background in neuropsychology from University College London, so we count her as a part of the team. It's not a kid. It's not a kid, it's not a kid, it's a kid. But she's a fabulous musician with a separate solo career altogether with a bunch of CDs. You can find her online at demandathorp.com, right? Okay. Okay, I'm Joel Adou and I'm a professor of neuroscience at NYU. And now we're going to do a song called, what are we doing? My Mind's Eye. There we go. So, My Mind's Eye is another one about the way the mind plays tricks on us and does things that we don't always know too much about. And if I can remember where this thing goes, this time we're being good shit. Okay. So, take it away. I was thinking. Can't think. Couldn't hold a dramatic mind yet. One, two, three. If you look into my Mind's Eye, you would see the way that I cry. Deep inside in my Mind's Eye. We had love, but it was good. You were there, you understood. Everything, yes, everything. You can't always trust what you think you know, can't trust what you believe. Sometimes your mind just puts on a show. It's simply a disease. If My Mind's Eye, you were mine, but My Mind's Eye was mine. If you look into my Mind's Eye, you would see the way that I cry. Deep inside in my Mind's Eye. You can't always trust what you think you know, can't trust what you believe. Sometimes your mind just puts on a show. It's simply a disease. Deep inside in my Mind's Eye. You were mine, My Mind's Eye was mine. My Mind's Eye was mine. My Mind's Eye was mine. Thank you. Nothing reminds me of your Mind's Eye. There are problems with our psyches, but there's also a lot of joy being a human being as well, which I hope we're all smiling about every minute of the day. This is actually some of our favorite songs. It's by Joe. It's called Map of Your Mind. Okay, here we go. Okay. Made a map of your Mind. I've charted my course. Deep inside, got the winds of force, got the heat of your heart, keep me from the cold, got the currents of will, take me to your soul. I'm on a journey out of God today. It's a war that I knew I meant. And excursion of the inside. It's a trip fueled by fire. Made a map of your Mind. I've charted my course. I'm sailing deep inside, got the winds of force, got the heat of your heart, keep me from the cold, got the currents of will, take me to your soul. I'm just hoping ourselves will be true. That they'll take me straight to you. Let the winds blow through God's sleep. So when I land, my mind's for me. I've got the heat of your heart, keep me from the cold, got the currents of will, take me to your soul. Made a map of your Mind. Take me to your soul. Made a map of your Mind. Take me to your soul. To your soul. To your soul. To your soul. To your soul. All right, thank you. Now we have a song called Trace, which is something that people here have studied, of traces of memories, how they leave permanent records in the neurons and now the DNA and the neurotransmitters from having the memory, it's really there. So it's a connection between our daily lives and the discoveries about the neurological systems of our brains. The song is called Trace. I'm removing now into the memory part of the show. We do a couple songs about memory. This one being the first one. You left a trace in my memory, a permanent place. In my synoptics, say the time, feels all pain. The time can't erase, your place in my brain. The days and nights, they were so fine. Months and years, may be sublime. Time stood still, while it flew on by. Time ended, when you said goodbye. You left a trace in my memory, a permanent place. In my synoptics, say the time, feels all pain. Time can't erase, your place in my brain. Time can't erase, your place in my memory. You're a dominant trace, you won't erase. You're a dominant trace, you won't erase. You're a dominant trace, you won't erase. You're a dominant trace, you'll never be erased. Thank you. For those who are sort of neuroscience aficionados, that song was written over a dinner with Richard Morris and un Presidential hashtag Jiuress and ducks and andTOs. This, another song about memory, and it's about Neuroscience songs or love songs and that's the way we kind of tell the story of the brain You got us this on Okay, turn that off for a second. She's a good scientist. I saw you leaving. You saw me too. You smiled at me. That's what you do. I tried to follow, but you were gone. Now I'm awake, sitting home alone. Keep thinking about your smile and eyes. Can't believe your words were lost. You made me happy, so very glad. Can't forget those times we had. There must be something in my brain. There must be something in my veins. There must be something in my veins. There must be something in my veins. I didn't know, but you'd be there. And the weak also, it's so hard to realize. I wasn't really aware you're at. I dream about you. Most every night. I dream you're there. Everything's alright. I keep hoping. My dreams will come true. But I'll wake up right next to you. There must be something in my brain. There must be something in my veins. There must be some crime or glue. That keeps my memories stuck on you. I keep thinking about your smile and eyes. Can't believe your words were lost. You made me happy, so very glad. I can't forget those times we had. There must be something in my brain. There must be something in my veins. There must be some crime or glue. That keeps my memories stuck on you. That keeps my memories stuck on you. That keeps my memories stuck on you. We've done memory and the mind-body problem, the unconscious, and now we're turning to fear. It's almost 8 o'clock. If anybody wants us to keep playing, raise your hand if you want us to stop. We'll play a couple more songs. When the night is dark, I lose my fear. When the night is dark, never shed a tear. Then the daylight comes, scares me away. The daylight comes, and I have to fake. When the night is dark, I feel so free. When the night is dark, the night is dark. I feel the peace. Then the daylight comes, and scares me away. When the daylight comes, it's when I have to fake. When the night is dark, I come alive. When the night is dark, I begin to thrive. When the daylight comes, scares me away. When the daylight comes, daylight comes, when I have to fake. When the daylight comes, scares me away. When the daylight comes, when I have to fake. We're going to close things out here with a song that ends where we started. We're going to close things out here with a song that ends where we started. I've got a mind-body problem. I don't know what to do. I've got a problem. I don't know what to do. My body wants you so. My mind says no. You said you'd always love me. To me it'd be true. You said you'd love me. To me it'd be true. Well now you're gone. I'm sad and blue. Well now you're back. You want me again. Now you're back. You want me again. If I relent, I lose in the end. I've got a mind-body problem. I don't know what to do. I've got a problem. I don't know what to do. My body wants you so. My mind says no no no no no no no no no no no. I even tried religion. Get over you. I even tried religion. To get over you. My body's not your song. Oh, you're back. I've got a problem. I don't know what to do. I can't get over it. I can't get over it. Oh, yeah baby. I'm going insane. I've got a mind-body problem. I don't know what to do. I've got a problem. I don't know what to do. My body wants you so. My mind says no. Okay, thank you and good night. Thanks. You've been great. Thanks for coming out here tonight. Enjoy the conference.