I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
When I moved
like
here, we're
leaving with it.
And
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
We'll have a story in Adam Sacks, Multimedia Director and Publicist Gottfried Wagner,
psychoanalyst Ava Wahl, and journalist Phil Zabriski.
On Saturday, May 16th, humans and animals, continuities and discontinuities.
With mind-body investigator Theodore Diamond Jr., animal cognitive scientist Irene Pepperberg
and Diana Reese and others.
I also wanted to alert you to the upcoming Helix Center annual benefit dinner, which
will take place Friday evening May 8th.
Information and tickets are available through the Helix Center website at www.helixcenter.org.
And please follow us on Facebook and Twitter and tweet generously.
So today's roundtable, The Changing Nature of Free Will.
There are more extensive biographies than the introduction I'll provide.
They're on your handouts and also on the website.
But as I introduce each of the participants, if he or she can raise her, the audience will
identify you.
Akhil Bill Gromi is the Sidney Morgan Besser Professor of Philosophy at Columbia University.
His main areas of research are philosophy of mind and language, technology and political
philosophy.
He's the author of three books, Belief and Meaning, Self-Knowledge and Resentment, and
Secularism, Identity and Enchantment.
He's currently writing a book on the Nature of Value, Practical Reason and Agency.
Louis Cabra is the Pagnelli Bull Professor of Economics and International Business at
NYU's Stern School of Business.
His research focuses on the dynamics of firm competition, both from the antitrust and from
the strategy perspectives.
His research topics include reputation, learning, network effects, sunk costs, innovation,
strategic risk choice.
In addition to numerous journal articles, he is the author of Introduction to Industrial
Organization.
Brigitte Kahl is a professor of New Testament at Union Theological Seminary in New York
and associate professor at the Religion Department at Columbia.
A biblical scholar with strong interdisciplinary and ecological leanings, a major focus of
a recent work has been between New Testament and Roman Empire, especially with the Groud
to the Letters of Paul.
He is the author of numerous articles and several books, including Galatians Reimagined, Reading
with the Eyes of the Vanquished.
Ken Kishida is a research scientist in the Computational Psychiatry Unit at the Virginia
Tech Carilion Research Institute.
He investigates neurobiological processes underlying human choice behavior using computational
approaches paired with measurements of behavior and associated neural activity.
Such experiments designed to expose how the brain encodes computations important for adaptive
choice behavior.
Simon Coshan is professor emeritus and senior research scientist in the mathematics department
of Princeton University.
A recipient of the Frank Nelson Cole Prize in number theory of the American Mathematical
Society, his interest lie in mathematical logic, number theory, and quantum mechanics.
His work on the foundation of quantum mechanics includes the paper with Ernest Specker on the
Coshan Specker Paradox and with John Conway on the free screen and now to our round table.
All right.
Well, I have difficulty.
Usually when I talk about science with other neuroscientists, not very often with philosophers
or theologians.
So I know why myself and folks that I tell the rest of us here are interested in the
problem or what value you guys have placed on this idea.
I don't work exactly on free-wearing topics that you've heard just before.
Did that include free-well?
A lot of different things, not this.
I think it's a fascinating topic, one that I'm interested in.
I've been reading mostly about, and I don't do a lot of research on.
Just to get things started, I mean, personally, I don't think that free-well is a proposition
that can be proven or disproven in a way that's agree from that.
I see free-well primarily as an axiom.
If there is no free-well, then what's my identity?
The thing that I do that I think is just the result of the temporal events or it's totally
conditioned by particles or whatever the negation of free-well is, then I would have no identity.
And I cannot imagine a world where I wouldn't be I.
So I like to think of free-well as an axiom.
I think it can be studied.
It can be falsified in some way, but I would rather think about it as an axiom rather than
a proposition that we can prove or disprove.
Just to name you.
So, I mean, let's just jump in.
I'll add a bit to that.
So when I've thought about this in the past, before I really pursued a role in science,
trying to answer these kinds of questions, in that transition, I've found that actually
the idea of free-well, it has this kind of use as a belief to frame how we do think about
ourselves and how the choices we make have an impact.
But from a scientific perspective, I actually find that it's very challenging to use that
idea to go in and study the thing that it's trying to capture.
When you get into discussions of free-well or consciousness, a lot of it boils down to
an hour of trying for everyone involved to define and talk about free-well.
When we're talking about free-well, to me it seems like what it is is we're interested
in how humans make choices, right?
The choice of behaviors that we see.
We want to explain when we execute certain acts, it has some rare professions.
Could we have done something different?
Have we been at that moment again?
And we want to try to explain that.
To me, it seems like it's a useful idea, only to fill in a gap where we haven't really explored
it very much.
As a neuroscientist, I've been interested in studying choice behavior from a biological
standpoint and trying to understand what does lead to the varieties of choice that we express.
I wouldn't say that it's free.
There's really nothing free about what humans or any other biological organism does.
Everything comes at a cost.
We can't go on forever without eating or sleeping or breathing.
There's a real constraints on the kinds of choices that we can make and how we can navigate
the world.
On the other hand, as humans, we seem to gain some control over the environment so that
we can have these luxuries.
We can sit in a room and talk about things rather than be out hunting and gathering our
resources and shelters, right?
We get this kind of luxury and that expands to lots of other domains where we create some
freedom from our past, I guess.
So let me just ask you something.
Would you agree with the proposition that the only reason why we cannot predict behavior
of a certain agent, be it human or non-human, is lack of precision in measurement?
That one day, if we measure neurologically with sufficient accuracy, every single neuron
of the human brain, we'll be able to model and predict behavior.
Yeah, so in some ways we do predict behavior.
If I want to make you feel bad, I'll insult you, right?
Or I'll attack you physically, right?
And that will have very differences on how you're going to act with me.
I have kids, and so when I want them to do certain strategies that I could use to interact
with them and others that won't be very effective.
From a scientific standpoint, you can put people or pigeons into a Skinner box where they can
make choices and you can set up the reward, schedule the hovers in such a way that they
will act actually quite predictably.
In some sense, it's in probabilistic terms, right?
Decision, decision, it is not perfect.
It's probabilistic, as he said, and rightly so.
Is that error term in your models?
Is that due to measurement error or is it due to something that's inherent to the model
that you model?
I think it's the big philosophical or whatever question about free will.
Is it all a matter of measurement?
The only reason why I cannot predict exactly what you're the rat or human subject is going
to do is that I'm not measuring carefully enough, or is there any fundamental, if you
will, of uncertainty which cannot be properly predicted?
Let me interject here.
Part of that question is, is the uncertainty, our knowledge of what's going on as philosophers
say, epistemic?
Or is there an underlying uncertainty here?
So I'm a mathematician and might ask why I'm here altogether.
But about eight years ago, I proved a result together with John Conway at Princeton, which
is a refinement of a much older theorem going back with Anchbeck as Swiss mathematician,
almost 50 years.
And the question there is the underlying question is not directly about the question of determinism
in the universe.
Is the universe strictly deterministic in a quite precise way that classical physics
in seismic Newton has said that if you know the state of the, not in the mind know, if
the state of the universe is whatever it is at a given time, classical physics tells you
that the state of the universe, both at any other time, both in the future and the past,
is totally determined.
So that was started a century by Isaac Newton in his system of the universe.
And that brings in an old philosophical question that goes back over 2,000 years between the
Stoics and Epicurus and the Romans, with Lucretius and Cicero.
And the more modern version is what Hume started and Hobbes in the 18th century.
And it's what's called compatibilism by philosophers is free will compatible with such a deterministic
picture of the universe.
So the contribution that these theorems make that I was talking about is to say that it's
pointless to even talk about that because modern physics in the form of quantum mechanics
gives rise to certain experiments, which shows that, so quantum mechanics itself, if you
accept it, says that even if you're nicely the state as much as you can, what's called
a pure state, at the present time for a closed system, like a particle or several, then the
future, you can, for the future, you can only talk about probabilities for that.
And if you accept quantum mechanics, that's not epistemological.
It's not our knowledge, it's just an ontological fact that you cannot give, that there are
probabilities only that you can give.
What the theorem that I'm talking about says is, see, people didn't like that point of
view.
Even the founders of quantum mechanics, like Schrodinger and Einstein, really were not
very happy with this whole idea of there being an inherent probability.
And various people have tried to get back to a classical picture which reproduces the
question, but says that these are probabilities, if you knew the underlying states, would be
just a lack of knowledge of the underlying hidden variables.
So an example of biology is we have probabilities attached to inherited traits, like blue eyes
and brown eyes, one uses these probabilities, but men don't introduce a sort of hidden variable,
namely jigine, which nobody knew existed at that time, but if it explains the process
of endowment and factors, it explains the probabilities very well, and eventually they
were actually founders as molecules.
So people who believe in such hidden variables feel that they might try to explain the probabilities
of quantum mechanics in the same way.
This theorem, I'm not going to make a distinction between Schrodinger and myself, and then somewhat
improved on myself.
It says that you can't put quantum mechanics.
If you try to give a classical explanation of certain experiments that we came up with,
you'll run into a contradiction.
If you actually want to say what the future state is, I can explain this in more detail
if people want later.
But there's just a series of 40 experiments in this which quantum mechanics gives probabilities
for the outcomes.
But if you try to give, say this is the outcome for this, you simply run into mathematical
contradiction.
So that's what the theorem is about.
This is that the whole, this argument between what are called compatibilists and those who
believe compatibilism and free will are, in fact, they are not compatible.
That is to say that free will and determinism are incompatible, the incompatible list, that
argument is an old-fashioned argument which now since quantum mechanics for almost 100
years is simply out of date.
One doesn't have to talk about this compatibilism because quantum mechanics is a pro-intontologically
probabilistic theory.
It says we will never get back to a classical kind of deterministic universe.
The question broadly is whether those who believe in free will, will find comfort in
the fact that we move from some level of certainty to predictions that are merely probabilistic.
They might say that the real threat to free will is that you should see it as that human
agency is susceptible to prediction even if the prediction is demoted to a probabilistic
prediction for the reasons that you and others have established.
So, there are two questions that seem to suggest that there is a more principled issue
about freedom than one of whether the system, the school system is to be seen in probabilistic
terms or something more close to certainty.
One is to raise the question, you see if it is the case that all laws, even in Newton's
mechanics, laws presumably come with a heterosperivistic clauses with all things being equal clauses,
in Latin it is called cadaerosparibus clauses, that is you hold certain things steady.
So you can predict so long as certain conditions are met.
So there is a clause which says it says it were looking out for things that allow for
exceptions and saying those must not arise, those conditions must not arise.
Now the trouble with human behaviour is that if you were tempted to say that certain intentions
and choices and preferences, if one were tempted to say that their laws are the probabilistic
or more definite forms of law, if one were tempted to say their laws would say if you
made certain choices or had certain preferences you would act in such and such way.
The trouble is when we try and say what has to be in a cadaerosparibus clause, it is just
about everything.
Right?
I mean if I say if I believe that water will quench my thirst and so I predict that I
will, if I have that thirst and that belief I will drink that water, that could go, that
prediction could be falsified by just about anything.
Right?
Why am I being too lazy to pick it up?
Why am I being too busy talking to pick it up?
Why am I preferring orange juice to drinking that?
It could be just about anything.
So what has to be held steady when one says all things being equal I will drink that water
if I have that visit.
We have no ex-anti-hould over all that has to be held steady.
But if you compare what has to be held steady, say in the law of falling bodies in Newton,
you can ex-anti-state in a very general way what has to be held steady.
And that's part of the problem that you were raising.
We have no, all the, all things being equal clauses as it were have to come exposed.
We can't, ex-anti-say what has to be held steady.
I think that's part of the problem.
Isn't that the promise of neuroscience that we will be able to control that?
I mean if you get down to the really nitty-gritty of neurological activity that eventually if
you measure sufficiently well, you should be able to control for all of those conditions.
You know, your past behavior, your state of, the state of the world could also be the state
of your mind measured in some precise way.
Right.
So you can't do that but by changing the subject.
That is, you couldn't do it with the vocabulary of orange juice first and so on.
You'd have to do it with the vocabulary of neurophysiological states.
Right.
So in a sense you change, you can do that by a reductive change of the subject.
Right.
You can't do it with the vocabulary of beliefs, desires, preferences, etc.
You can talk about brain states and then the question arises, well we wanted a prediction
with this vocabulary.
You've given us a prediction in a different vocabulary and that really is in a way the
mind-minded problem.
And it seems like some of the resistance to that change in vocabulary.
It's not the vocabulary that we use day to day.
Right.
And the value from what I understand about free will.
We're not so concerned about whether or not our pet dog has free will.
We care about whether or not other humans have free will.
Because when they do, either don't accept or that we want to support, we want to assign
them credit or not.
And there's, I think, good evidence that this is something that's very important to our
species.
It's something that's evolved in how we process information about others.
It's how we organize in small groups but also bigger structures.
So if you change the vocabulary to a biological one or a physiological one, there's a worry
that then the whole social structure which is built on this other language will collapse.
And it's actually what's going to happen with exceptions based on what we understand from
medicine and neurobiology.
So whether it's legal or whether it's interpersonal, if a person has a particular psychiatric condition
and it causes them to act in certain ways, treat it or untreated, we don't treat them
the same way as a society, as someone who does not have that condition.
Right.
And that's true in many cases.
Just because you can make, it doesn't seem to remove agency.
It doesn't seem to remove control.
In fact, actually, I think it actually enhances it and provides more control as we start to
understand where these constraints come from, from our biology or our environment, the interactions
we have.
Once we recognize that they are constraints, we could do things as a society.
We can make choices to remove them, to make things more equal, a more level playing field.
And so in some sense, by changing the language, learning what is or is not predictable, we're
actually gaining more control.
So wait, so that makes it sound as if the more determined we are and the more knowledge
we have of the determining factors, the more free we are.
As we come to understand that, so I'm not sure if you're making, but it says though
as we learn about it, we become determined.
Right.
So I guess what I'm saying is that there are forces that we're completely unaware of
in our biology and in our environment that have impact on the way we make decisions.
Right.
Right now.
But I thought your point was that once we come to know more about those determining factors,
we actually get a bit of control and therefore are more free.
Yes.
So there's nothing more free is different from completely free.
Right.
More control, more choice.
It is a pair of paradox in that, isn't it?
But usually we thought agency was threatened by determinism and you're suggesting agency
is enhanced by determinism so long as knowledge of the determinism.
So if we're going from determinism to completely free will or some version of compatibleism,
that is not the language that I actually find useful to talk about these things.
From the work that I do and the way that I approach these problems, I can make observations
that can control certain experimental settings and I can make measurements and generate models
for what I might expect to do in the future.
So generating essentially scientific beliefs.
When we talk about free will and when we get really heated debates over that, what we're
actually talking about is human behavior.
When we see others and so in the space of trying to explain human behavior, we can learn
more about what is guiding that.
I agree with you that if we know more about what is determining our behavior, we do in
a sense become more liberated because we know what the knowledge of necessity is actually
a liberating thing.
But here's the interesting, it's really very fastily about the docs which is that what
you say is absolutely right.
The more we find out about, so if I'm angry and I've figured out what exactly the well
springs of my anger are, I have no anger.
That's the point that Spinozo is making.
But here's the fascinating thing, that is true only if it is piecemeal.
If it's piecemeal, there is something which when it's small, my anger or some particular
thing, one thing or the other, but if one had nothing but the perspective of seeing oneself
say as a sacri-endless sees one, just in a detached way, if one made that thing comprehend
offensive, we would have no agency.
So the very thing which when it's small is liberating in just the way you describe, if
you just blow it up to say make it a comprehensive thing saying, well we can just see all our
behavior as present and future.
And that's the end of agency.
Well, it creates an interesting question I think about agency.
Where does that begin and then?
What are those boundaries?
So from a biological perspective, an organism has physical boundaries, but that's different
from I think the agency that you're talking about or the sense of it.
So while I exist in the body that I walk around in, I interact with people in exchange information
either consciously but also quite implicitly.
Just being in a room full of folks or being in a conversation, your brain is processing
this information in ways that's guiding how you're going to behave in ways that you're
not necessarily aware of.
And so for an observer of an agent in that context, our readout of their agency is really
based on their behavior.
It always comes back to one brain or one system looking at another system and trying to determine
who is the agent.
The hard question is what goes on when one is observing oneself.
And what I was, of course, if you observe and study yourself, you will get more control
of yourself in the future.
And if you do nothing, if you have no other point of view on yourself but that of detached
observation, then you've gotten rid of agents.
So there must be some other perspective you have on yourself over and above a detached
study of yourself.
That is what everyone means by freedom.
It's quite fascinating to listen to all that and trying to translate it into the way
which I am working.
And I am just noticing that the same problems but in a different key have been the technology
throughout the centuries.
And it is so interesting and this is a reason why I really thought I should come here and
just listen to you and see where we are in that.
So this big kind of paradoxical juxtaposition between determinism on the one hand, so things
are determined.
And in theology, of course, we say there is this supreme being called God, the deity that
has created everything and has this kind of sovereignty over things that happen.
So that is the kind of person who destines us or destines us or is the kind of determinating
force.
And then on the other hand, of course, we also need free will because if everything is already
set by God, then what the hell are we doing and how come that there is a judgment or that
there is repentance, that we can change, that there is conversion.
And all these things that as this constant appeal to our moral agency or kind of spiritual
agency to change who we are.
And I think I have never worked on free will because I always thought this is kind of a
dead end discussion because theologians have kind of constantly been in battle about that.
I mean, you know, you have two positions.
One kind of camp says and they are often well the heretics.
They said there is free will.
Even after the fall of Adam and Eve in paradise, you still can do good.
And then there is the other position that says no, we cannot do good.
And when you were talking, I just about my decisions and thinking about what I am doing.
I just was kind of thinking of Paul who said, oh, I'm miserable.
I'm such a miserable being because I constantly do what I not want.
You know, I know what is good.
I know what I want to do.
But how come that I constantly do the opposite?
You know, that is, you know, my freedom is restricted and why is my freedom restricted?
And then there is this big term sin.
I'm in bondage.
I am kind of, I see the things I would like to do, but I don't do them because the novel
law is at work in my limbs, in my hand, then what my mind tells me.
So and then Paul says, you know, but there is a way out of that.
And here is the question, how kind of theologians are asking them, where are we going with that?
What is at stake in this debate?
Is at stake, eat eggs or bacon for breakfast?
Or is this choice or is something else at stake?
Can we, can we, can we do, can we even keep the world in a state that is deliverable,
for example?
Or are we kind of doomed to turn it into hell?
I think this is the theological question.
So do we have the agency to do good or are we all under the spell of evil?
And this is why I'm so interested in listening to neuroscience and to quantum mechanics.
I think that all is this kind of, on the one hand, we are far more determined than we think
we are.
And on the other hand, there is a space of freedom.
I mean, this is what I hear you to say and do I hear you wrong or is?
I mean, I think it's interesting when we ask the question of this force, that this pushing
is for it.
And it also speaks, I think, where is agency?
So agency, free will.
These are ideas that seem to be very useful to us as human beings.
And it's something that we do care a lot about.
We spend a lot of cycles thinking about.
From a biological perspective, there is a lot of stake and it's a survival of our species.
And that's always been the case.
And that's true for any species on this planet.
It's always been about the survival of the species.
And so there are things that will promote the survival and things that will demote that.
And evolution by natural selection would say that basically you, that which survives
when.
So there's no really other direction on it.
Those ideas or those things that support the survival of the species on to the next stage
and the next generation are fit.
And so I'd actually propose a compromise between what some popular scientists view on
religion and what religion's role has been for humanity is that there has, it's been
a useful idea.
It helps organize our day to day where we fit in the world.
If it wasn't useful to us as a species, it would have been dropped long ago, right?
And we would have all passed.
And we haven't done that.
We hang on to these ideas of being an agent or having free will or all kinds of narratives.
And science is its own narrative based on experimentation and empirical thought.
So you think that's also true for free will as an instrument for all agency that's necessary
for living in society?
I think it's something that we hang on to as a species because it is useful.
At some point it occurred to me personally, well what if I didn't have free will?
Well what if I don't?
Well what if I don't?
Well my life doesn't really change.
I can't really change my behavior in any other way, right?
So the choices I make or the choices I make, I'm chasing some value for every choice.
And it's kind of letting go of that idea and looking to other ways to explain my behavior
or others' behavior became more interesting.
But there's all kinds of ideas that I think that do carry some value to us.
And where that comes from, where that value comes from, that's an open question I think.
I think it's hard to deny what you're saying.
But I'm wondering if the term useful is the right term.
All my instincts are to say that there's something more lofty about the norm which
says we ought not to shape the concept of human freedom.
Not that it's just that it's useful, but we ought not to.
So I have a loftier sense of the norm than norms of utility.
One way to ask the question which your work establishes that there is a notion of free.
There's a falsity about determinism in the way you've in the move from Newtonian mechanics
to contemporary physics.
One thing we might ask is what is the location for the idea of norms or the usefulness of
the notion of agency, which is partly what you were saying too.
Here's a very simple question, suppose you did something, suppose X did something very
harmful because it's a delightful sake or for personal gain or something like that.
And somebody else say why did the same harmful thing because he was forced to do it, say
physically forced or somebody put a machine gun to his head and said do it all, shoot
you.
So X and Y do exactly the same thing, it's a bad thing.
This does it because he wants to do it, wants to gain from it, etc.
Why does it because somebody's just forced him to do it, say physically.
Now we will never give up the distinction between these two people.
Now ever much we find out about the brain, whatever we find out, all the things that
you know that these current, you know, is it Libet, how do you pronounce his name?
Libet, Libet, others have done.
Let's see, they're all right, right?
All of its neuroscience establishes this.
Will we ever give up the distinction between X and Y?
I think that's an empirical question, right?
That's something so empirical in the sense that...
No, I'm suggesting we ought not to give up the distinction.
So I'm denying it's an empirical question.
I'm saying it's a normative question.
We should never, we should not give up.
We should say somebody was forced to do it, should be treated differently from somebody
who did it.
So now...
So just for the right, I do agree with you.
I also share that belief that we ought not abandon that distinction.
But when I say that it's empirical, say for simplicity sake, there's two halves of the
population.
One half the population believes that we should remove that distinction.
You know they have things that we ought not.
And then there's changes in the environment.
There's grand scale forces in the environment that change whether it's societal level or
why not.
So holding one belief or the other is beneficial to the species.
Then it'll be determined at that point in time which basically wins out.
So it's kind of a very abstract idea of whether or not we should maintain this distinction
about responsibility for actions.
But if it's not a useful idea that promotes the genes that we carry, then I would say
that it's empirical in that sense that evolutionary forces can kind of going forward.
Time will determine that for us.
Now, I do agree with you that we ought not lose that distinction.
And I think part of that is it's come from our past that there might have been a period
in time where we couldn't make that distinction.
Right?
And in this case, in the course of so we're not really clear who's actually the cause
of the sort of agent, whether it's a person or the person that's been manipulated.
And we struggle with assigning that.
First of all, when you say species, you mean the human species?
So what about all the part of us that is very similar in terms of behavior to animals?
What do you say to that?
And are you saying that free will is a property of being part of the human species?
Only in the sense that humans care about it.
It's a belief or it's an idea that humans discuss and debate over.
There's actually...
From what I killed said becomes more immoral.
What you said has a moral connotation.
That's also something that the human species uniquely cares about.
So these are ideas that are very important to us.
And they're probably important to us who are a very good reason.
And there's a reason that we don't want to let go of them.
Because when we do the structure of our society would likely fall apart.
It would just be very different.
We wouldn't be human anymore.
It's part of how we identify ourselves as being human.
I think what Simon said, you would not...
Your proposal, your proposition doesn't only be humans.
Well, we're talking... yes.
So we're talking about determinism and then we have to talk about free will.
Now my own feeling is that compatibilism really doesn't make a lot of sense.
That if things are determinant, totally, and that applies to the... exactly to the situation
where it's no different than being coerced from the outside, is that everything is determined,
you can't make that distinction between the two cases that you talked about.
So I really think that question is so...
Let me make a point here about...
Is it really possible to get rid of determinism in an absolute way?
See, these theorems that I was talking about, they're saying that a classical theory, which
is deterministic, that doesn't hold water anymore because of, say, these experiments,
those 40 experiments, but usually a classical theory is not simply telling...
A scientific theory is not history.
It tells you...
It gives you general laws and tells you whatever the state is, it'll tell you what happens
afterwards and if it's classical, it'll tell you in a deterministic theory.
If I lift this up, say, 9 feet, it doesn't know that if I...
It should take three-quarters of second to fall.
That's not magic, it just follows a well-known law that if you remember your high school
physics, it's that the height, the S, is equal to 16 T squared in feet and seconds.
And if I put in for the height of 9 feet, then I get 9 over 16 and it's...
You take it and I get 3 over 4.
Now, to know that it's...
Interesting, perhaps, but that's not what scientific theories are about.
I also want to know if I lift it up 16 feet, then it's going to take a full second by using
the...
And how that works on the different conditions that tells me this.
And this theorem I was talking about, that classical physics doesn't work, is of this
type.
You have to know that no matter what possibility, suppose somebody says, yes, well, I'll tell
you...
Well, in one of these 40...
A particular one of these 40 experiments and I'll be right, perhaps.
But I said, no, you have to tell me this in all of these.
Now, that's what physics is supposed to predict different things.
But suppose somebody says, I'm not interested in scientific theories, I believe in a being
who's prescient.
It doesn't have to be omnipotent, but he has to be present.
He has to tell you what happens in the future.
And I say, well, this experiment says you won't be able to predict.
He says, no, this being doesn't have to predict everything.
He'll tell you that you have to do this thing in particular, this experiment.
In that experiment, I'll tell you what it is.
So you see, this theorem doesn't act against a prescient being who tells you what the actual
trajectory of the world is.
Scientific theories don't tell you the actual trajectory.
They tell you the possible trajectory starting from any particular state.
And that's very different.
So this theorem that I was talking about can't argue directly against this kind of prescience.
In order to do that, I would have to put in a little bit of my own free will, namely,
these 40 experiments correspond to one of 40 buttons I pick.
You have to give me the free will to press one of these 40 buttons.
So some electromagnet changes in direction.
And then with that, even a prescient person cannot predict all the 40.
All he got into a mathematical contradiction.
See, there is no absolute proof that that determinism doesn't work.
Let me give you a more homely example.
You know, when I was young, I was growing up in England.
I loved movies.
And I went to once each week.
And one day I saw a movie I really liked, Casablanca.
I think you all know the movie.
And at the movie, Rick, Humphrey Bogart, has two letters of transit, forgetting out of Casablanca
to the free world.
And there are three people there, Ingrid Bergman, the love of his life and her husband, who's
a freedom fighter.
The question that Humphrey Bogart has to make answers, which one of the two is he going
to give the transit of?
So I mean, I didn't know which one he was going to choose.
It really was a question.
And of course, we know he does the noble thing.
I'm not giving anything away at this point, I think.
And he allows the Ingrid Bergman and the husband to leave.
He joins the Free French with Claude Rains, the Vichy police captain, where they now join
the Free French at the beginning of a beautiful friendship.
So that's the story.
By the way, afterwards, it really was a free world decision because the script writers
had couldn't decide which way to end and then finally decided on this.
But I want to say is this, I liked the movie so much.
I went to see it next week with a friend of mine.
He had never seen it.
And he had the same thing.
Humphrey Bogart has a free world decision, right?
He didn't have a free world decision.
This was the second show.
Right?
So he couldn't, he had to make that.
Now my point is this.
You know, here's the universe.
And you know, there's a famous mathematician at the Institute for Advanced Study.
And aside from his work in logic, he was a privateer also, he was a friend of Einstein.
And in his usual quirky way, he found a solution to the relativistic equations, which is a
cycle that is to say the universe completely repeats itself.
Now that's a possibility then.
So here's the universe.
Maybe there is free will and maybe not.
But in the second showing, there cannot be any free will, right?
So this sort of logical possibility shows you cannot get away with proving that, you
know, you cannot get away from proving that determinism, you know, that determinism can't
work.
It shows that, you know, that in the second showing, everything is totally determined
because it happened the same way as this just like in the movie.
Right?
So you have to get, there is no, it's a little like, it's solipsism.
There is no absolute logical proof that says that you want just a figment of my imagination.
You know, you've tried to surprise me and this and that.
And of course you happen and we know there is such a model because when I go to bed at
night, I dream and these people are figments of my imagination.
Do surprise me and so on.
So it is a fact that it could be the solipsism is a logical, it's ridiculous, but it's a
logical possibility.
And determinism is exactly the same thing by the second showing.
In my opinion, ridiculous.
If you ask a child of four or five whether they have free will and I've tried this and
they say, well, of course I have free will.
You have to be sophisticated and talk about things like determinism either from a religious
or scientific point of view to start believing that that we aren't all robots and everything
is determined.
So my point is that there is no absolute proof of either the determinism doesn't work or
that solipsism for that matter doesn't work.
We have to show free will and that's the same thing with free will.
So actually I tied in a little bit with what I said earlier that I like to think of free
will as something that's not falsifiable in a scientific way.
Therefore there's a sense in which it's more of an axiom than my point is the opposite.
You have there is no way of establishing free will absolutely.
Oh, I agree with that.
And like in this theorem we have a little bit of free will of pressing one of these 40 buttons
then I can say that the whole world is spontaneous.
You know that actions of particles are spontaneous in this sense given this theorem in quantum
mechanics.
But you have to, there's no absolute proof.
You have to put in a little, you know if somebody says look you're assuming free will to prove
it.
Well I can say look you know it's like the fisherman he puts in a minnow and catches
a trout and some.
There I saw you put the fish in what have you done.
You have to assume a little bit of free will and then the whole world becomes an arena for
free will or even of particles.
But you know it has to become simply an axiom the free will exists because there's no way
of proving it absolutely.
I mean may I go back to what Ken said before.
The issue of survival of species and you kind of made it look pretty easy.
I mean you know we do serve our survival but we don't.
What if we are addicted and we know the kind of the kind of the brain chemistry of addiction
is an interesting thing.
What if we are addicted through our whatever what happens in our brain if we like something
that actually destroys us.
So isn't that a step forward in the debate on free will or not.
I mean you know the kind of we are you know we the way we live is that really conducive
to survival.
I mean in economy in well in ecology in all in politics in all respects.
I mean so are we and then you know here's again where the theology comes in because you
know these people and I'm just realizing it while listening to our debate here.
These people have been kind of brutally realistic saying you know we have the bondage of free
will.
I mean this was one of the big terms in the 16th century.
The bondage of free will versus free will.
So that is a rasmas of Rotterdam versus Martin Luther.
So they kind of Luther says that is not such a thing as free will.
Only theoretically but practically we are kind of we are in in prison in cause by things
we can't control really.
And that is what I would call really a translation.
We are addicted to doing exactly what destroys us.
So how do we deal with that?
Yes so so you know addiction from a medical sense versus for the way you're describing
I think there's a good analogy there but but it is a very different thing we were talking
about addiction of course.
But there are certain ideas that we are compelled to.
So so if we all held the exact same idea and it was the wrong idea that would be detrimental
to our species right whether it was an idea or a behavior or something they were expressing.
But the wonderful thing about any species is its diversity.
And that's really what protects a species for future events.
And so our biology sets us up for us and that's not just expressed in our tall we are a hair
color or all these other features but it also expresses itself in our brain structure which
gives rise to our beliefs and our behaviors.
Having that diversity is really important for any species.
And so having this debate and having ideas kind of develop is probably the thing we want
to do.
We don't want to actually settle on the wrong answer for sure.
Since we don't know where we are going to find something future.
But addiction to fossil fuel may have a gene.
It may.
But you know what I think is when I was saying that it may be a norm, a moral norm that we
don't cease to see ourselves as agents with freedom even in the face, even if determinism
were established and neuroscience.
I was really giving a secular version of many of the things you were saying when you talked
about good and evil and so on.
So I mean that is certainly how a lot of people think of it in theological terms.
But you can also just think of it in secular terms and talk of just normative and moral
and so on.
We are both saying the same things in dramatically different idioms.
But you know that suggests and I think you want to say too partly when you say it's just
an axiom.
It's not the sort of thing that you will allow to be refuted by this thing.
And I'm suggesting that the disallowing is a normative stance, a moral stance.
So there seems to be some convergence on this and even you agree.
You talk of it in terms of usefulness which I've some quam about.
But that's a matter of detail.
So here's a question which I want to bring in on this.
The kinds of things you were talking about discusses free will at a level of abstraction
that is what has been surfing here is that it's a normative notion as well.
So maybe we should just say it's an ambiguous notion.
Free will is just an ambiguous notion.
So let's say freedom which is studied as a purely metaphysical thing in terms of scientific
laws, what interpretation we give to them and so on.
That's freedom in its purest most metaphysic.
Let's give another name to what has emerged as freedom as a normative stance.
Let's call it freedom.
And it's that freedom is the notion that everybody's always been interested in.
With everybody.
Has always been interested in.
So I would call it choice behavior.
I mean I think that's when we talk about free will.
I don't care.
Call it X.
Call it X.
It doesn't call it anything you like.
The point is it's just two different notions.
So my hesitation to freedom versus free will is that first of all freedom I wouldn't know
where to start with to go looking for what to observe, what to measure there or how to
even think about that.
With free will it has only because we all know that phrase.
But if a simplistic point you know the word free has six or seven definitions.
The word will has a dozen.
You multiply those together.
I mean you're getting a whole variety of things that it could possibly mean.
So it is absolutely ambiguous and whether it's an axiom or I think I would actually put as
a belief.
It's not as useful to me for what I want to do with whatever it is that we're talking
about to do anything with.
What I find interesting is that when we talk about free will we're not talking about the
behavior of other organisms except for when the conversation kind of diverges.
We're talking about people.
We're talking about human behavior and how do we make judgments over that behavior?
How do we use it?
Do it perhaps freedom might be something useful to go in a direction and define it specifically.
But I think whatever that is it was for me it was back down to how do humans behave or
do those choices come from.
Okay but do we have a concession from neuroscientists?
That's what you are right.
So do we have a concession from neuroscientists that all the delivery research on freedom makes
no difference to freedom?
I'm not sure what freedom is.
If I'm going to commit to something I would want to know.
You know what freedom is.
I got the notion from your remarks about usefulness and so on with some modifications.
I study human choice behavior.
But you talked about the usefulness of a certain concept which we don't.
So I'm talking about the concept or the idea.
So I'm talking about what you're talking about.
So you know what I'm talking about.
I guess so.
Let's go with it.
So do we have a concession from somebody who researches a neuroscientist that whatever
the deliverances of your research are they leave completely untouched.
This other thing call it whatever you like but you know about it because you raised this
concept.
You named it.
And I would not conceive as far as the way I'm understanding what you're saying.
Neuroscience research and trying to understand how the brain works and how it gives rise
to human behavior does a lot of things on which we could observe.
And a lot of the behaviors we observe in humans are expressions of the beliefs that we carry
with us.
So I'm trying to gather what you might mean by freedom or some other concept whether it's
free will or something else.
And in the spaces where we can agree and do something productive as two agents.
But when we're talking about beliefs whatever kind of belief that might be.
That is an area that's not as well explored in neuroscience as a visual system or how
we smell things in the world.
But it's a real thing.
And it's a big problem in the medical industry with a placebo effect.
Where simply the idea can actually have an impact on your nervous system and it's not
just compliant behavior but you actually see physiological changes due to the suggestion
that this pill is going to help you.
So the impact that beliefs have on human nervous systems is very real.
It's something that we don't understand completely but it's something that should be researched
more.
No, no, so can it change any?
So just to try to bring it to things together.
Do you agree that as neuroscience improves its methods, its measurement techniques and
so forth that there will always be a irreducible degree of unpredictability of human behavior
or that it's purely a matter of measurement.
If there is an irreducible level of unpredictability, we can call that trithm.
The fact that even given all the addictions, even given all the neurological conditions
that people have, even given all the beliefs as you wanted to find them.
A choice in humans which is inherent to that human for one reason or another and I'm not
going to go into quantum mechanics at this point.
There's an irreducible level of prediction that we can agree to call that whatever you
want to call it.
But it seems to me that what we're entering here with this is the intractable mind-brought
theory problem in general.
This is a sort of special case having to do with beliefs and free will and so on.
The question is what is the neurology, neuroscience, to do with the brain?
How does that connect up with the mind?
My own feeling at the moment is that it's got interesting things to say but it does not
cross that chasm.
I don't know how that chasm can ever be crossed.
I've read many books by both philosophers and neuroscientists.
There's always a big gap that happens at the level of neurons and what happens, it does
not cross into the mind.
That's a separate issue.
I don't know if it can ever be crossed but it seems to me the free will and the question
of what happens in neurobiology is a special case.
I should have the frustration.
A lot of neuroscientists will say that the mind is just the brain in whatever it does.
That is stated with a lot of faith.
It's not clear that that's actually been demonstrated.
What we know is that when I do things to brain tissue that I can change the expression of
behavior, which is our proxy for mind.
It's one thing to say that what happens in the brain is a determinant for what happens
in the mind.
We don't actually know a great way of mental behavior other than the things that we could
measure which would be the brain activity of behavior.
I believe that to a large extent.
That's why I believe the relevance of quantum mechanics and the fact that there is indeterminism
in the material world outside of the brain, outside of humans, that in fact something
is going on in the brain which makes use of that freedom of particles.
We know very little about what happens.
A lot of people who work in neurobiology says, well, quantum mechanics doesn't play
a role in this.
It doesn't probably at this level that is being seen.
Evolution is very opportunistic.
It seems to me very likely that in the end what's happening in the brain at the level
of molecules does not use all kinds of purely quantum tunneling and this kind of correlations
that happen in quantum mechanics.
There are purely quantum mechanical that there's not being used at the molecular level.
I believe that's what's going on.
That's what happened.
That's not been investigated yet.
Well, simply because it's very hard to investigate what happens at that level in quantum mechanics,
and when it's set up in special experiments, it's very hard to deal with it, although there
are many interesting experiments going on at the level of single particles.
But in the brain it's much, much harder, of course.
I believe that in the end it will be shown that there are critical effects to play an
important role in what's going on in the brain.
I think in the end that the free will that we feel it will be connected up with this
kind of spontaneity that happens in the particles because I do believe that the arguments made
by people like humans don't hold much water.
I think he's talking, by the way, about free action.
He talks about if action is not coerced from the outside and I do what I want, then this
is you, then I'm now half free will.
I think that just simply begs the question.
It could be that I don't have free will anyway because everything is determined, but it just
happens to be that he was talking about classical mechanics.
If you talk about quantum mechanics, the whole question doesn't arise anyway.
So if I understand what you're saying, you're making a case for something like a random
number generator at the moment.
That's another point.
You see, the incompatibleists say, I agree with what I was saying here, that compatibleism
is in fact doesn't agree with free will.
So they bring in random choice or random things.
Then the compatibilists say, well, you know better often than we are.
If part of your choice is that you throw a coin and your choice is based on whether
it's heads or tails, how have you gotten away?
How's that free will?
So random choice doesn't help.
There's a subtle point here.
What happens in quantum mechanics is not random choice.
If I do a single act, look at the decay of a single particle, it will decay at a certain
time, and that happens at a purely random time.
That's true.
But what happens in quantum mechanics is if you have several, say two particles that become
entangled or correlated in a quantum mechanical way, then what they do together is far from
random.
What happens here, actually in the case, what's called the Einstein Podolsky, Rosen
experiment, the EPI experiment, what happens actually determines what happens in the other
one.
And you get effects that are very, very different from random choice.
And it's these correlations which can happen over distances that I think play in a major
will end up playing a major role in understanding how the brain works, and in particular how
free will can occur in the brain.
It's not random, that's a classical notion, which is sort of, you know, it's supplying
something much more radical in quantum mechanics that is a relatively random choice, but it's
a kind of correlated choice that happens that's much more complicated.
Can I just jump in on that?
I just want to understand what you are saying, because I have the impression that for me
it's something like music, what you are saying.
I mean, and I don't fully understand it, but I have a sense that this matters and that
is translatable into some kind of theologians have been discussing in a completely different
language.
And it would be very helpful if we could make these languages compatible in order to understand
what we are each talking about.
And what I hear you saying about spontaneity, something about leaps that are not random,
but still leaps.
I mean, so something, so in theology the kind of vocabulary for that is something new is
happening.
You know, that is not random, but it is something things are coming together, and it is no longer
the question whether I go to Macy's and I choose a black dress or a blue dress.
I mean, this is not this kind of free-built thing, but it is something can I go beyond
the or, you know, in which I am trapped, I mean, I don't use this or that, but it doesn't
make a difference, or it makes a difference, but it is not the difference that I would
say is the theological difference, the difference between life and death, survival or not survival.
I mean, you know, kind of going out of this bondage of choosing things that are destructive
and finding a way to live that is no longer self-destructive, for example, self-destructive.
By kind of things coming together, happening in a way I don't know where, sub-atomic or
whatever you, how you call that or in the brain, the neurons or whatever.
So the, I mean, this is what theologians have been discussing, is there, and they have talked
about spirit in that.
The spirit transforms the ways we act and they transform the whole experiment.
It is a different, it is moved in a different space on a different, and there all of a sudden
we see things happen before.
And it is not random, it is not, it's still in this kind of oral shape, but it is something
that maybe we didn't expect.
Let me bring up something you said in this action, and with your two cases, one of which
is coerced and the other one isn't.
You're mentioning addiction.
As you look at a person who is really addicted to heroin or cigarettes, and he really can't
get around that.
Now if you say, I want a cigarette, I want to smoke a cigarette, and I smoke it, the
human would say, okay, you're using your free will.
But if I'm really a, I may not want what I want, right?
Yes, but I can't get around it.
I'm coerced in that sense internally.
And this is by the way, this argument that determinism cannot be compatible with free
will.
Because if determinants happen inside, simply because I wanted, I'm being forced to want
it, just like an addict.
So this idea of addiction sort of makes no one, I think, in this room would say that
somebody who's addicted to heroin and thus bad things is at the same level as somebody
who's not.
And that's a big distinction.
We all feel there's a moral distinction there.
Right.
And I think this idea then is, you know, we all agree on this, and how it plays out from
the idea of general physical theories is a very difficult question.
As I said, there are no very good, current experiments that bring into the brain this
idea of spontaneous action of particles.
By the way, that's a very old idea I mentioned, Epicurus actually brought in 2300 years ago
the very, this very idea.
He said, look, you know, there was this idea of democracy, said everything is atoms, and
things just fall into the void if they're heavy or go up into the heavens.
He says, first of all, there are actions going on if you do this, but also he won't
get free will.
So he posited tiny little, what do you click, you know, kilomens, is that what's called
now swerves.
And some of you may have read the Greenblatt's book called the Swerve.
It's about, you know, the cretious book on Epicurus.
And he introduced a sort of spontaneous action of the examples to interact, but also so that
the re-will can exist.
Because he didn't believe what these Chrysopus and the Stoics believed that you can have
free will if everything is determined.
So this I want my ideas really goes back to the Greeks of 2300 years ago.
So I guess I'm curious where you get where this goes from spontaneous action and molecules
because there is some evidence actually in the brain that there is a lot of spontaneous
activity.
And you could take tissue preparation to see the spontaneous activity.
Now whether that's tied to something we don't understand yet or if it is some kind of spontaneous
action that's a whole other area of research and it's ongoing.
I don't think, I don't know, people have talked about that there are articles saying
quantum mechanical effects already existed at the level of animals and they give examples
with bird flight and various other things.
I'm not convinced that doesn't sound.
The experiments are not that.
I mean are retina sensitive and have to detect a single photon.
Single photons are detected by the retina and go to detect them.
So it's clear that single particles like photons have an effect on the brain.
We essentially see one or two or three photons.
The thing that stunned me is that you could set things up so that a single photon could
cause a per-
Right?
You set them up, you get the experimental controlled and you give them the instruction.
When you see a photon get up and run a marathon and if they're willing participant that will
trigger it and they'll go.
That's a whole lot of activity that is spontated by a single photon.
It's kind of, but there are certainly other effects in the brain that are likely taking
on these effects.
So I'm curious, I guess where do you get from the spontaneous action to kind of a freedom
in choice?
Because when we talk about free choice the question is about who is in control, right?
Is it me, the agent that's in control or is it a control external to me?
You mustn't think of this, that a single particle in the brain, this spontaneity of
a single particle, I don't see that as translated into our free will.
It's a whole unknown network which is partly spontaneous, partly regulated by the network
itself that somehow gets translated.
I'm not saying I have any theory at all about it.
I just have the hope and even the expectation that nature works, evolution works in such
an opportunity.
I can't believe that it doesn't make use of these quantum mechanical effects.
I would share your disbelief.
I'm absolutely nature's.
I'd like you to get into these.
Is there any reason to expect that the kinds of non-random forms of spontaneity that you
feel is established within?
I call it random.
It's a non-random.
It's non-random.
It's a realistic thing, but these correlations are not random.
That's what I say.
Oh, sorry, non-random.
So the question is, is there any reason to believe that what you, let's say rightly
claim that there's non-random forms of spontaneity that counter the deterministic aspect, that
those things will coincide with the things that in understanding the free will we talk
about such as intentions to pick up this thing.
I mean, it just seems to me there's absolutely, we have no framework by which to say this
non-random spontaneity that's established in case by case translate into the intention
that with which I drank this, which constitutes my freedom, the intention with which he picked
up the microphone, which we have no framework to say that these two things will coincide.
No, coincide.
But there are experiments in which single molecules, I suppose, that you recognize your
grandmother.
You know, what's sometimes called the grandmother cell.
Single cells, I should say, not particles.
Single cells may have such effects.
So the fact that, you see, there are some correlations of this type between what happens
in neurobiology and what happens at the level of mind that you're talking about.
Whether free will will be one of them, I don't know.
I'd have, that's only a hope and pay maybe, you know, an expectation, but that's all
it is.
There are some sort of more simple things in your bio correlate.
Because if you take Liebe's experiments, you know, these RPs, which are detected by
the EEG and so on, are speaking directly what's measuring what's going on when somebody's
flexing, you know, contracting a muscle to raise the wrist and so on and so forth.
But there's a, immediately, I mean, the observations of the evidence are immediately linked to things
which have to do with the intention that's involved when I flex my wrist, et cetera.
But you are talking at a level of abstraction and distance from this when you talk about,
you know, the non-random, sort of spontaneity that is then, I'd be have no framework by
which to bring these two things together.
So maybe there's something here.
So one thing that humans are really good at are telling stories but also filling in details,
right?
So I can imagine that there might be some kind of spontaneous action that gives rise
to behavior that's unpredictable even for the agent themselves or for others.
But then it's filled in with, well, why did I do that?
Well, and then you kind of fill in these confidedly the stories from the agent's perspective.
But if you don't have a framework which connects them, it sounds like pure fantasy to me.
You have to have a framework which says the spontaneity established at the quantum level,
et cetera, are the sorts of things that are relevant to the intention to drink this or
to pick up that mic and so on.
Whereas, we have a framework by which to link what is delivered by Libe's experimental
objects and things like flexing the wrist and so on.
These things are just theoretically.
There's a chasm between them.
And you have to say, well, we can expect the two things will be brought together.
If you don't have a framework to think, it sounds like a completely idle speculation.
But there are some not free will or more complex, but at least there are things in the mind,
for instance, recognizing a person which are connected to single cells having certain
things.
I was hoping that another speaker would be, another discussant would be here.
Peter say, I think there was talk of inviting him.
He does experience, I don't know a lot of what he does, but I read an article at the
level of the scientific American in which he does experiments in which certain decisions
are connected up again to a single molecule, large molecule, an organic molecule, but activating
the molecule is connected up to certain decisions.
I'm not, this is far from anything like that.
I think we'll continue to have these and many more experiments that I think made extraordinary
progress in the understanding of the working of the brain and the human family.
The question I think, the fundamental question is, what is it going to say about free will
ultimately?
And I think we're always, correct if I'm wrong, but I think from a point of view of
theory of quantum theory, we're always going to hit an undecidability wall as it were regarding
the true nature of human choice.
Correct if I'm wrong.
We're going to understand it a lot better, exactly.
Remember, this spontaneity of, you can't explain, well, it satisfies these quantum
mechanical rules.
Why is a particle choose to go back in a famous Stern-Gail Act experiment that silver atoms
sent through some kind of electromagnetic field and it's a size to go this way or this way?
And that's the end of the story.
The choice it makes between this and that simply is left as part of the theory and there's
no explanation.
If you try to give an explanation of this, then you're back to classical physics and
you run into this kind of contradiction.
You just simply cannot explain, you're stuck with this spontaneity is like as it is with
Epicurus.
It's there and you have to accept it.
The question is how do you connect that to free well?
I can't tell you.
I mean, I don't know.
I think we will go now to the audience for their questions.
I want to be brief.
Please questions in preference to comments.
With all respect, I believe this discussion has confused the indeterminacy of the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle which governs subatomic particles with the nature of our behavior.
I mean, our behavior is determined by the firing of neurons so that it is completely
deterministic.
No, it doesn't go at all.
I mean, if a photon hits our retina and that may be a random event or a non-deterministic
event, our subsequent behavior is still deterministic.
I don't know how you come to that conclusion.
The firing of neurons.
So what?
I mean, how do we don't know how there's a certain classical level at which they fire,
but there's all kinds of things going on at the atomic level which we know that atomic
interactions satisfy the rules of quantum mechanics.
How this counts?
How ever once?
I don't know.
However, once the neurons fire, our behavior is completely determined.
We don't have control over that.
So there's room in between a neuron within the brain firing in the actual expression
of the behavior.
So you could have folks who have had physical injuries that would actually block that communication
reaching to the muscles.
So just having neurons fired doesn't exactly mean that you're going to get the expression
of some behavior absolutely.
I mean, it's always going to be probabilistic.
You might have that window defined so that it's extremely high probability, but all kinds
of things could have been not just within the biological agent, but also the environment.
So we're talking about making the connection between neural activity and some kind of behavior
or choice and all things being equal.
That's more.
But we don't know exactly how the quantum effects within the molecules that make up
the neurons.
And that's just an open question.
So I'll just end that.
And the firing is at the end of the...
Or once everything is fired, you can say the decision is made.
Yes, but what about what happened until then?
I mean, that could be...
That's beyond our choice.
That's beyond our choice.
That's random.
Or non-deterministic.
It's life and non-choice choice.
That doesn't follow.
So some of the choices we make now will have a huge impact on where we end up five years
from now.
And so that's not just in our choices.
That includes the kind of neural activity that might go on five years from now.
So there is an idea in decision neuroscience of goal-directed behavior and goal-directed
decision-making where we might have some goal put off in time.
And so we can start to do things between now and then so that it's not immediate effect,
but start to build support and structure so that we could achieve those goals, right?
But how is that non-deterministic?
I'm not saying it's not necessarily...
Thank you, Madam Chair.
The firing of the neurons in the brain, some in collective manner.
That's what constitutes the decision itself.
And the firing may itself have a spontaneous or free will...
We don't know what causes this firing, that firing, how they come together in some complicated
way.
To say that because after the fire...
There's no decision after they fire, yes, but we're talking about what happens until
there's some collective firing of the neurons, leads, gives us the decision that we make.
All of that, as a matter of neurobiology, may have a spontaneous element, which is what
we call making the decision.
Okay, thanks.
Just going to sound like that, I'm picking up on the same as previous question, but it's
different.
I'd like to offer obviously, obviously, overly simplistic, but causal model that attempts
to integrate some of the different things I've been talked about.
So it starts at the quantum level with virtual particle pair creation.
This is being a quantum phenomenon.
It's a non-deterministic event.
It's also the case that some of these virtual particles emerge and typically fall back to
the vacuum state once they emerge.
Sometimes they're energetic enough to remain in our level of physical reality, if you would
allow that.
So if we couple this happening within neural tissue, and one of those newly created, non-deterministic
and virtual particles then interacts with the intracellular neuronal environment in such
a way that it contributes to the firing or not firing threshold of that neuron, then we
have a potential example of the relationship between quantum non-determinism and neural
particle.
So then we take it the next step and to the research that you mentioned about the effect
of partially magnetic fields, the neocortex generates a weak electromagnetic field, which
may in fact have also an effect on the way in which the virtual particles enter or not
acts on that may or not be about approaching firing threshold.
And it's also the case in terms of the molecule mentioned that we now know a great deal more
than we knew even last year about the molecules that are recruited in the, say, memory formation
process and the DSBs, the dual strand breakages and reconstitution that caused the formation
of America.
All of these events involve the recruitment of the effect of molecules that could be brought
about by the activation of the virtual particle made real.
That's my idea and I would like, first of course, your opinion.
There are many quantum mechanical effects, including the virtual particles we have created
and go back and forth and some that say, I mentioned another tunneling, there's another
one.
To me the question of quantum mechanical, what are called entanglement or correlations,
play it probably.
But all this is speculation.
It's all speculation.
But it does, you know, it's worth speculating in this way, because without that, we're
back to the compatibility question, which I think is now a relevant given quantum mechanics.
Okay.
Thank you very much.
We're talking about the utility of belief in free will, regardless of whether it might
be an illusion or not.
Pew research in 2014 conducted a poll and they found that 54% of Americans deny that climate
change is happening and that human beings are causing it.
Now, let's take me as an example.
Let's say I believe in free will and you're a scientist and you're telling me I am of
my free will, I'm causing climate change that may cause, you know, catastrophic effects
to the entire world, to civilization, then wouldn't that free will believe, perhaps,
contribute to my denying that climate change is happening in order to preserve my self-worth,
myself identity?
I can't even want to tackle this.
So let me have it in.
We've been ignoring the information about climate change and making decisions that are
destroying the planet, let's say.
And your question is, is this not an exercise or will for an exercise at free will?
No, the question is if I believe in free will and scientists are telling me that I'm doing
this, wouldn't I be much more likely to go into denial in order to not feel guilty and
indict myself and other people?
I see.
Well, this may be, you know, I mean, on this subject I feel that the causal links between
our behavior, fossil fuel addicted behavior and the differences to the climate have not
been established with the same spectacular public visibility as, for instance, the causal
links between nuclear power and the destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki establish.
The reason why we all know about the nuclear possibilities of nuclear disaster is that
the links, the causal links between our behavior and some disaster were completely, in fact,
spectacularly established in the nuclear case, there's still a matter of arcane knowledges
in the climate change case.
And that's the real problem.
We just have not got the causal links established for the public mind everywhere.
And maybe we're doing this out of guilt and maybe there are people who are doing it willfully,
but corporations are paying people to hide the facts and so on.
But by and large I think the real thing is to get the information out in a way that it
was out in the nuclear thing.
Nobody denies that the knowledge is in the nuclear case.
It's just different in the climate case.
And it took Hiroshima and Nagasaki to establish that causal link.
But I think that is a difference because the, I mean, changing our behavior with regard
to fossil usage and climate change and ecology requires us to kind of change, I mean, the
things we like.
It is the addiction issue.
I mean, I like my cigarette and if I'm a drunk user, I need that and I don't want to
change.
So, you know, if they tell me this is going to happen, I mean, we see it is happening
now, but you know, if it's still the powerful happen in 10 years, in 20 years.
So why not cave in and just enjoy it?
That's absolutely true.
I agree with you.
And I think what you mentioned of St. Paul actually goes back to this.
This is, if you put it that way, this is no different from the fact that most of us know
that if we fill our gut at every meal, we're going to die before we would if we didn't
do so.
And yet most of us do fill our gut.
So it's, the climate change case is not different once you describe it that way.
And in that sense, it's an irrationality of the kind that Paul and others mentioned,
right?
We know the better.
We do the worse.
And also, in some sense, a perversion of what used to be rational, right?
So it used to be the case that we should fill our gut at every meal because our meals didn't
come three times a day, right?
And likewise, the addictions to cigarettes.
I mean, these are experiments that I have participated with and looked at in the groups
that I've worked with.
Nicotine gets into your brain and it changes the chemistry fundamentally.
And we have experiments, Terrell Rans and Reid Montague to my colleagues, Rann, that
show that fundamental computations that are very important to how we learn new information.
That representation in our brain is changed by these drugs of addiction.
And there's new work coming along where we're looking at how beliefs could either insulate
us from taking on new information or not, right?
And I think as far as with the climate change issue, people know what's important to them
and their family.
And that either insulates them from new information or allows them to bring it in.
And I mean, if it's 50-50 split, it just gives you an idea of how the variety of beliefs
that we have will have an impact on what comes next.
It's a connection to free will, I think that it's not so clear to me.
Okay, thank you.
I just want to say thanks for having this discussion.
This is the most important topic in the history of time.
So whoever's in charge here should have more free will discussions because there's no more
important topic.
I just want my name is Nick.
I'm actually the producer of a TV show Wednesday, channel 56 time one.
It's called free will question mark.
You debate free will every Wednesday at 11 K Blaxes Manhattan, George is my co-host over
there.
And he has a show on white planes.
I went back to my question.
Can any of you geniuses who, all right, can any of you guys give me one example in your
entire life that was a free will decision or anybody in the audience?
Just give me one example of a free will decision.
Coming here today.
Was there a cause for that decision?
Was there a cause or a reason for that decision?
Well, there's, I'm an economist.
So I think there's, that costs their benefits.
I've balanced them and I made a decision.
What's.
So there was.
Or a reason to your decision.
You just admitted it, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
That cause and a cause to that cause.
You can regress your cause and cause will change back to the moment before you were
born.
We didn't self cause ourselves.
Our parents had sex.
Therefore that's an easy reputation of free will.
I don't know what's so difficult for you to admit.
So part of the cause was, was my own decision of my mind.
Our self cause, you're a little guy, you're a first cause.
You can cause things without any prior causation.
Is that what you're telling me?
No.
So you're just saying.
You jump in actually.
Wait, wait, so you said his decision to come here was a freely willed decision and it had
a cause.
You just said that, right?
Yeah.
And that cause has a cause and that cause has a cause.
Regressing back to the moment before you were conceived, before the planets were, you
know, evolved before the big bang.
The cause is, just because there are causes doesn't mean there.
I'll tell you what the cause is.
I know what the cause is.
The cause is a cause.
It doesn't mean it's a determining cause.
You know, Leidenitz had a certain principle of sufficient reason and which he says, everything
that happens has a cause that actually determines it.
Some mechanics tells you that that law is false.
It's simply false.
Okay, so determinism or indeterminism does not prove free will.
I mean, if you make an indeterminism.
Wait a minute.
Wait a minute.
So I'm just saying, you know, there are restrictions on my freedom.
Certainly I can't grow through that wall even if I want to because it won't stop.
It'll stop me from going through it.
On the other hand, I can walk around in the room.
I mean, just because it's not a question of randomness or complete free will or what
have you versus completely determined things by causes.
There's a whole complex of causes that says, I'm going to marry this woman determining
some of them not.
I want to make this more simple.
Okay.
I don't know any of you guys.
The cause is always the pleasure principle, otherwise not as hedonic imperative.
You're always predicting what will give you the most amount of pleasure and the least
amount of pain.
So that's the cause for every decision.
You have no choice but to do that.
No free will.
I don't know why we have to have.
That's your theory.
But I think we can.
I think I'll be happy to.
It's after the meeting.
But I think so.
You're going to tell me how I can promise you after the meeting.
After the meeting you and I will discuss it.
My thing is every cause is going toward your every human being has no choice but to attempt
to go.
No, I heard that.
I heard that.
So no.
The belief in free will is very harmful.
It's very toxic.
It makes people hate other people.
It causes suicide.
People want to punish themselves because they think they could have done otherwise which
is obviously BS.
And it makes people feel like failures when they fail at something.
I think whoever believes in free will needs to take a hard look in the mirror and just
know that you believe in free will because you have no choice but to do what makes you
feel best about yourself for going toward the part of the way.
Thank you.
Next question.
Hello hello.
He's constrained to do it, right?
Yeah.
Everything alone.
It makes people hate their personal history as a conditioner.
The next question.
Next question.
Okay.
So that was a perfect segue for me.
My name is Sheila Meats.
Okay.
And I do this work as a profession.
I've done thousands of sessions.
And what some people here may know about energy psychology is what we're learning as all negative
emotion comes from a disturbed energy field and tapping on certain points while we hold
consciousness in mind to tuning it to an issue actually brings it up to the surface.
And what I have found is that there has been no evidence of free will from my work with
my clients because once I clear whether we talk about the information or morphogenetic
fields that you may know about as a scientist from Bruce Lipton's information on cellular
biology wherever you go with that, once we find that information and we remove that information
that person starts unfolding in different behavior.
So it's still on some level determinism.
But what I'd like to do is talk about the spiritual aspect.
And I'm probably going to be a pain in the buck is every time I'm going to come here,
I'm going to talk about spirituality.
But I feel like people aren't talking about it enough.
As far as first cause is concerned is being pleasure.
That's a possibility.
That's certainly a belief.
But I'm going to go beyond that.
And I really want to hear what you have to say.
And I'll sit.
But I had an enlightenment experience that deeply changed my life where I got to experience
myself as that or as God or divine or whatever.
And what I want to say is and hear what you have to say is if there is nothing but God
creator divine and God contains all that there is to be known and nature is God expressing
as law and law runs everything which is sentient and non-sentient isn't that determinism.
Isn't it possible that free will is essential in us so that we as God expressing itself
will be able to abandon oneself to egoic experience?
Thank you.
You're wonderful.
The interesting thing is if God is the all determining cause you could just quote one
of these interesting by the versus where it says yes but God created human beings in God's
image.
So we have part of the part of this divine capacity to choose also.
And you know of course, in theology God is the supreme free will and that is no our free
will like that.
And then you have and you see there are this is what this is why I am not a systematic
theologian but a biblical scholar.
So my area is the Bible because this there is something else in storytelling than in constructing
dogmatic big buildings.
Stories tell things from the one side and from the other side.
So you have a story where you hear that human beings are there to rule the earth and even
subdue it which is a little bit horrible in light of contemporary concerns but they are
there they have free will.
The next story you read that is Genesis one Genesis two human beings are there and to
preserve the earth.
No freedom at all.
They have just to kind of to accept their role as stewards of creation and they have
to and what is necessary.
So how do you reconcile the two and yeah by telling stories and stories like that that
change you or you know and and I am kind of I'm finding these stories very interesting
what we tell each other about the moments where we we were not following the pleasure
principle but did I follow the pleasure principle in coming here.
No I was scared to death because I never really thought about free will you know this is not
my area you know I feel uncomfortable but I thought it is important and you see the
moment when we went out go out of our way and do something that we think is necessary.
This is why I'm interested in silence and in your I mean these kind of switches that
happen when we change the cause of our own habits and habitus and and kind of go into
a different mode and maybe look more at the other than at ourselves and all that.
I think and these things happen I know they happen so but you know this is what I think
is free will becomes a power that can change things and that's what I'm interested in here.
Thank you.
You know Isaac Bashaevis Simba said we must believe in free will we have no choice.
I want to preface my comments and questions with a statement that I appreciate everything
and everyone on the panel said today so this is a respectful if I have criticism it's respectful
it's not meant to be negative.
A little bit about myself undergraduate.
Keep in mind we have four other people.
I do that much time.
You don't have to worry about me being the case I'm very to the point.
So I appreciated that gentleman's passion and to the point.
My undergraduate molecular biologist from MIT JDMBA year spent at Penn Medical School.
I loved hearing all the comments reminded me of grad school.
Unfortunately it also reminded me of the fact that you guys are so brilliant that you're
talking up here and for the rest of us unfortunately it's very difficult because you're not defining
what you're operating terms are.
What is pre-determinism versus free will.
Dr. Cochin obviously a brilliant mathematician I appreciate that.
I spent time on the trading floor as a market maker and I understand probabilistic theory
but are we saying that free will it has to be a conscious decision in our own rational
best interest given what our probabilities are.
We never really nail that down.
So I to to the point shortly I have two very concrete questions.
One is and my almost respect to philosophy I think this is a philosophical exercise.
Philosophy informs everything we do.
My first question is, is this a philosophical exercise what is the purpose because from
my point of view people are rational beings.
But they don't always behave rationally.
So you cannot always predict their behavior.
Dr. Kribal I'm sure you would agree economists have this problem.
Keynesian economists have had problems with the economy all over the world.
We're looking at a currency crash and I'm not getting political but the Austrians their
main criticism is you can't quantify all human behavior.
People are rational beings but they also act with passion and irrationally.
I was saying to my colleague that maybe someone who would be very good on this panel would
be someone from the intelligence operations community.
They have to use game theory to predict human behavior.
Both in populations and excuse me let me just let me just let me let me tell you you have
two concrete questions.
I would like you to ask those two concrete questions.
I don't want you to expand on them because we have other people and then we have I limited
time.
And I don't know your name I don't know your background sir.
So intelligence community has failed to predict several instances.
Economists has failed.
Do you acknowledge that this is a useful exercise?
Interesting.
But there is no concrete end point in this because unfortunately you cannot always predict
human behavior and you I'll put it in more concrete terms in experimental design.
In experimental design it is important to define your independent as well as your dependent
variables.
This is multifactorial.
If we want to talk about photons all day long we could.
Certainly there's an effect.
The sum of those effects does it affect us?
Yes.
What is the point of the exercise and what are your operating definitions?
It's a why and I don't mean to be disrespectful.
I really just want to understand.
Thank you.
The why is important.
But as far as I'm concerned let me try to answer.
Talk about prediction and of course it's very close to related to the issue of free will.
If there's free will then there's no prediction whenever there's human behavior.
I actually think the distinction or the distance between human based endeavors like economics
and non-behavioral endeavors like physics or thermodynamics or what have you is smaller
than distance between simple models and complex models.
Simple models in economics for example studying treasury bill auctions when people do models
of that they actually pretty good fairly accurate in predicting price levels and trade volumes.
If models trying to predict the economy which is an incredibly complex system we do very
poorly.
The thing is true in fact if you think about it nowadays with physical sciences it's very
easy to have laboratory models of Newtonian classic mechanics that are extremely good
at predicting whatever you want to predict but we still cannot successfully predict whether
more than five or six days.
Why?
Because it's an incredibly complex model.
So I don't think it's so much an issue about I don't think free will in here displaying
a very important role it's more a matter of model complexity that's the economist answer
to that.
Thank you.
Thank you.
As a biologist it reminds me of nature versus nurture it's interesting but thank you for
everything you've done.
Okay.
Thank you so much for your round table this is wonderful.
What is your definition each of you of will not free will but will and how does it exclude
animals or exclude animals it's been a very it's it was brought up briefly but just how
does it exclude animals or does it.
So I'll just start with my shared confusion I think on what we mean by free will and we
talk about it being ambiguous or what is it exactly right so.
For me when I think about this question I actually set it aside because the notion of
free will or will it could be choice it could be intent to choose it could be a whole range
of things that we all as individuals kind of share some stake in with the definition ends
up being.
But what it is we're talking about when we talk about free will is how do people make
choices where do those choices come from what motivates them and so for me as a neurologist
I study that behavior I study the organism which we call humans and I give them choices
and I study their brain activity and so so the idea of a will or free will is a provocative
concept and it has used to discuss these kinds of things but what I'm interested when I think
about that is our capacity for choice in what controls that.
I do think that's a very important and I think I'm not going to say anything about the will
because I think the issue can be raised by just talking about freedom and not talking
about some particular faculty called the will.
And this sort of sums up I guess my angle on many of the interesting things that have
come up in what have surfaced and what my colleagues have said.
You see I completely agree that in the end this is a special topic within the larger
problem of the mind-body problem and I agree with people like Libet they're not really
with the conclusions he becomes to on that particular evidence that he provides but I
generally agree with the view that there is a real sense in which if you talk about the
dispositions of an animal's mind which yield the animals behavior and you talk about the
dispositions of bodies whether animals are human beings there is bound to be a reduction
in some sense of the dispositions the mental dispositions to the physical dispositions.
So if there is freedom and if the mind is in some way not in these ways dependent on
or reducible to the dispositions of the body it can only be I think it carries the mind
contains an element that is normative.
If you think of the mind human beings or animals or if you think of human beings as being just
like animals then the mind has tendencies just because they are mental tendencies rather
than bodily or physical tendencies doesn't mean that they are outside of nature.
So if nature is deterministic and not as you suggest it is if nature is deterministic then
the mind because if it contains nothing but natural tendencies is determined and there
is no sense as you have been saying but if the mind contains a normative element that
is when people so suppose an animal has its behavior it does something it's frustrated
it changes to something else you might think well that's animal rationality well maybe
it is animal rationality but the animal doesn't change the behavior by thinking what I did
was wrong there is no normative element right it just gets frustrated and it moves to something
else that's not normative in the full fled sense of thinking this was wrong I ought to
do this it's normativity of that kind which I think is not possessed by animals it's
possessed only by us and that's what I think if anything shows that the mind is not just
tendencies in nature but it's such a part.
You know the question of will really touches on the psychology question of motivation but
Rob and I both of us stayed out of this discussion because we didn't want to bring that in.
Which I not to get tongue tight here.
Most of the dialogue was focused kind of from this anthropomorphic viewpoint on specifically
around the problems concerning the individual.
I think that's maybe because like the first step is to conquer this idea of losing our
self or our dualist intuitions that we have this kind of privileged seat in the Cartesian
theater and that science can't probe the subjective but and I think that's my maybe it's a language
thing that if we develop the language but my question what I was interested in more so
was supposing that we can overcome that for the moment and suspend our disbelief.
Move away from this anthropomorphic perspective on free will and think about it.
Kind of superhuman and purely materialistic level.
The question is is matter moving towards and possibly if it's not capable of achieving
free will and would that be a kind of way to move towards a kind of designed determinism
in a way that makes any sense.
Who can take them this?
So one of the things that I tried to put forth and the way that I see the progress of science
on these kinds of problems is that as we learn how the system operates right our brain, our
bodies and system it gives us new options right so so there's lots of ways in which we
might not be able to make a choice that we might be constrained.
One of them is that we don't know what the options are.
If you don't know the option you don't ever have the option to make that choice.
So as we learn about what guides our choice behavior what constrains that we can have
longer term goals where we can intervene on that and actually the space of possibilities
right.
We do that by inventing new medicines or new technologies that give us 10 years ago.
In some sense we are increasing for our species the options going forth.
Some of them might not.
Thank you.
Hi, well there's been a very constructive flow of ideas.
I'm an undergraduate student and I'm really interested in artificial intelligence and
its impact on future upcoming technologies and especially more so how is quantum theory
going to I won't say determine but anticipate these future technologies and the impact on
our society and do you think that if given unlimited resources and unlimited I guess the
ultimate proficiency in algorithms could we create a machine that's capable of replicating
itself enough to maybe free willing.
Actually, so there is just within the last month or two is a paper study published by
a team at Google where they've developed an algorithm that could basically human level
control in the context of a video game space.
So it's a really interesting development kind of a cute experiment so they have their algorithm
play Atari 2600 games and they basically give the algorithm very little information about
as much information as you might have coming into a game and the algorithm can learn how
to play it to the level of a professional game tester with not better on some of the
games.
And so the report is called human level control through this deep reinforcement learning algorithm
and this is a the core of the algorithm is something that we look at how mammalian brains
and actually other systems do learn.
And so here it's not going to necessarily quantum level depictions but this is just
a computation that this algorithm is able to execute where it's able to learn from its
environment and feedback to the level of how you and I might play a video game.
So I mean if you're interested in that you should look at that.
So I mean I have a point of view in what I've said that the idea of free will isn't necessarily
a useful one for the world we're actually interested in studying here.
What we're interested in is how do humans behave?
What's the sources of that?
Whether it's free that's not necessarily useful.
All of our choices are constrained.
We're biologically so there are constraints there's limits to that.
Now that we can get a computer algorithm to display a level of control that a human can
within that environment I think is an interesting kind of demonstration of where technology
is going.
It does provide by the way I think an interesting test.
I don't know if you could run that test if you had a very large number of such highly
evolved artificial intelligence and intelligence beings.
It would be interesting to see whether there was any distinctive feature in their behavior
vis-a-vis humans in a variety of situations.
I think it would be an interesting test for at least some notion of free will.
If the answer is no then I would say that there is no free will as we're defining it
in here.
As at least as I was thinking of defining it I think.
Okay thank you very much.
