I'm Edward Narcissian, Director of the
Helix Center and I welcome you to
today's program on the topology of
fear. I should tell you that next
Saturday the program is on Elizabeth
Bishop and the participants are Bonnie
Costello, Lloyd Schwartz, Alice Quinn, and
Jean Valentine. Programs for April will
be on our website. On the website we
also now have a section for conversation
so if there are any thoughts and
questions that you have after today's
meeting or opinions that you have you
can go on that side on that
under conversation and write whatever
you are thinking. Today's round table
was proposed by Professor Gratiella
Chichilniski, she's Professor of Economics
at Columbia University. I'm going to just
give you very brief points from their
biography of the group, the biography of
the group or whatever, biography of the
biography of the, she's Professor of
Economics and Mathematical Statistics
and the University Senator at Columbia
University. She's Director of the
Consortium for Risk Management and has
worked extensively on the Kyoto
Protocol. She's the lead author of the
UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change and acts as a special advisor to
several UN organizations and heads of
state. Paul Glimsz, who like Gratiella, has
been here already before, is the Director
for the Center for Neuroeconomics at
New York University and Julius Silver
Professor of Neuroscience, Economics and
Psychology at NYU Center for Neuro
Science. He's the author of Foundations
for Neuroeconomic Analysis, Neuro
Economics, Decision Making and the Brain
and which is the winner of the American
Association of Publishers, Economics and
Social Sciences Book of the Year. His
book, Decisions on Certainty and the
Brain, the Science of Neuroeconomics is
the winner of the American Association
of Publishers, Publishers Medical
Sciences Book of the Year. Linda King is
Professor of Mathematics, Graduate
Center and Lehman College of the City
University of New York. She, her research
spans various parts of complex analysis
including complex dynamics, hyperbolic
manifolds and tachmulert theory. She's the
co-author of hyperbolic geometry from a
local viewpoint and has edited five books.
She's a recipient of the Edwin S. Webster
Abi Maas-Rockerfiller Award from MIT.
Joel Lidou, who has been here many times,
is Professor, his University Professor
and Henry and Lucy Moses, Professor of
Science, Center for Neuroscience at the
Department and the Center for Neural
Science and the Department of Psychology
at NYU. He's Director of the Emotional
Brain Institute and the author of the book
Emotional Brain, the mysterious under
paintings of emotional life and
synaptics self. How our brains become
who we are is the editor of the self from
soul to brain and co-editor of post-traumatic
stress disorder, basic science and
clinical practice. David Lichtenstein,
who's sitting here, is co-founder of
Aprecousa
Forum and adjunct professor of psychology
at the SUNY post-doctoral program and
also he's at Adelphi University
Durner Institute. He has written many
articles including Born in Exile, there's
no place like home and if it be not now,
right? And at the Cardozo, Cardozo Law
Review. So, Gratilla is going to get
things going. The topology of fear, which
is the title of this meeting today, this
roundtable, puts together two different
concepts. One from mathematics, pure
mathematics and that's topology and the
other one is fear and generally emotion.
And we have here specialists from both.
So, I wanted to introduce very briefly
the topic before we have the usual format
that these roundtables use. We're all
very curious about emotions and the
emotion of fear is very well understood
by anybody who looks at what happens on
an everyday basis and the press, what the
press chooses etc. And the article that
the topology of fear, which is here, is an
article I published a few years ago.
Essentially, looks for a mathematical
explanation of how fear fits and helps
define our decisions in a way that is
not the same as we are used to. And we are
talking, we are talking, we have here very
impressive specialists. In fact, the best
thing about this roundtable are the
people here. And so, I'm not going to be
talking too much about that because that's
their field, although I have done some
experimental work on this. But the
critical thing about topology is that it
helps you explain a form of rationality
that puts fear in a rational context in a
way that is different than what we are
used to in decisions, analysis, and in
psychology, and in economics, etc. etc.
in the social sciences. So how does that
work? The branch of mathematics, topology,
we were discussing just before with
Linda, who is a mathematician, as you can
tell you about that, is really about what
does it mean to be nearby? What does it
mean to be similar nearby? And they are
very different versions about what that
means. For example, you can say that the
weather in New York is similar to the
weather in Siberia. If, on average, we
have the same temperature. But if in
Siberia, or in a desert, the temperature
is extremely cold over parts of the year,
and then very hot over others, you would
say, no, it's not quite the same. So what
do you mean the weather is similar in New
York and in Siberia? What exactly do you
mean by that? There are two versions at
least two, but they are two actually. One
is, let's look at things on the average.
Let's look at the average of the weather
over this century, over this millennium,
that's one way, over the earth, that's
another way. The other way is look at
the extremals. What's the worst that can
happen? What's the highest and the lowest?
And we won't say that things are close
by unless the extremals are nearby. And if
we do that, we're looking at what nearby
means in a completely different way. We
define the completely different
apology, and all of a sudden what appear
to be rational behavior because of a
emotional reasons appears to be
mathematically very, very rational. So
just wanted to be more precise in the
paper, the topology of fear, Paul said
brief outline and he has to be very
brief. I looked at the disjoint that
appears when you try to explain in
experiments how people behave under
conditions of fear and they appear to
behave irrationally. An experiment upon
experiment and upon experiment shows
that. And where does it come from? So in
the paper I show that if you look at the
axioms which are the basic beliefs on
which the theory of decision is based,
and you assume that instead of making
decisions on the average and valuing the
average and caring about the average, you
look at the extreme ones. Mathematically
that difference is the topology of fear,
and in terms of decisions it leads you to
completely different decisions and
rationality for example. You would say
that if you wanted to invest in a fund
you may look at the average returns that
this fund brings to the investors. But
you may say that's okay that's all very
good but I'm afraid it will be a market
crash. Fear and therefore I'm going to
invest in the fund that assures me that
even if there is a market crash I will
have my money back or most of my money
back. Those are two criteria, completely
different criteria and depend on the
topology and I'm saying when you have
fear, when there is fear present, when
there is catastrophes, real events with
enormous consequences, you tend to use
the topology of fear to determine what's
close to each other and that leads you to
make decisions which are considered to
be irrational by the standard decision
theory. Namely, no I'm not going to invest
in the investment fund that gives me the
higher expected returns. Why? What's wrong
with you? Are you going to be rational? No,
I'm not. I'm afraid. I will give a lot of
weight to what happens in that fund in the
case of a market crash and I will not
optimize according to the what is the
expected return alone. I will not do that.
That's not irrational according to the
standard theory it turns to be rational
it cannot be explained. So by introducing
the topology of fear you can explain a
different form of rationality and then it
leads to the following criteria that is
okay I'm going to invest in the fund that
gives me the highest expected return
provided that the worst that can happen
in the case of a catastrophe I'm willing
to accept it. It's like maybe I will lose
5% of my portfolio but no more. Now this
sounds like a reasonable thing to do, particularly
these days with a gun being what it is.
But it's contradictory to what we think
is a rational decision making and it
leads people in experiments to say
humans are irrational. You just don't make
decisions by what you expect that will
happen. The expectation part is really
averaging things. The consideration of the
catastrophe and the extremal is looking
at the worst that can happen and it is
using the topology of fear. This turns out
to be mathematically connected with the
theory of the incompleteness of
mathematics and with the resolution that
Bertrand Russell gave to some of the biggest
contradictions that appear system that has
the richness of mathematics. But we are
going into details I wanted to explain
that going way beyond the issue of the
fund, the dimension, that is nice because
it's an everyday phenomenon that we're
not afraid of. How do we make decisions
about jumping into an accident and trying
to pull a person out? We are governed by
fear. Well under those conditions we need
to expand our notion of what rational
means and what the topology of fear does
it gives you a mathematical tool, a
measurement tool, an experimental tool to
define rationality in a way that admits
certain ambiguities and allows you to
cope both with the extremals that you
behave with when you are involved in a
situation that has a catastrophe or can
cause fear and at the same time the
average behavior that you consider when
you are being you know naturally weighing
the probabilities of what can happen. They
do things emerge. So the result of that
paper is that when you consider fear and
when extremals do matter and you use a
topology of fear which is your value
system, the topology of your value system
is what matters, what's similar to what.
Then you will end up behaving like that.
You will choose the electric network for
our city so that it maximizes a throughput
of electricity but minimizing the worst
that can happen in the case of a blackout.
Does it sound reasonable? Yes. It is
inconsistent with the way we view
rationality until now through averages.
So what I just said is reasonable but
there were notions of rationality until
now have eliminated it as if it was
irrational. I can give more and more
examples. So instead of doing that I
wanted to say that that gives you a use
for mathematics that really opens up a
completely different sphere and we will
hear maybe more about that from Linda but
I was told before by David that the
French are not adverse to using topology
when they try to study the internal
psychological behavior and she's going
to explain that in their own in help
people make decisions. So I think with
your permission I will stop here because
I am more interested in what these people
have to say than what I have to say. I
hope it's an introduction. It's the beginning
and right maybe you can pay
any sense of vision for it. Yeah I have a
comment and so you try to take an
everyday word like rationality and turn
into more of a scientific mathematical
concept. Is that correct? No. I mean no
it is my... No I think it's a very good
point. I have to say that Joe's work is fantastic
so you know it's my pleasure to be
answering your question. No what they do
is something different. I look at the
definition of rationality that we use in
just about every scientific discipline I
know and it has to do generally speaking
with having some actions and the
driving from those actions to logical
statements that we are willing to accept
because we accept the actions. That's the
way mathematics is constructed. I just
described to you what mathematics is. I
also described to you what is decision
theory? What is probability theory? We
start with axioms and then anything that
we're willing to accept as rational is
what derives from the actions in a
logical system that we accept. That's the
way science proceeds. I didn't say it should
proceed. I said proceeds. So the
rationality that I speak about is not a
loose word that we use at breakfast. Maybe
it should be but that's not what I'm
talking about. I'm talking about scientific
rationality. I'm talking about the fact
that quantum probability, quantum theory
has axioms that were defined by von Neumann
in 1932. From those axioms
logical speaking you derive the entire
quantum theory and everything can be
drawn back in the logical steps, mathematical
steps to the axioms. That's rationality.
So what have I done here? How am I
redefining rationality? Am I changing the
logic? No. What am I doing? I'm changing
the axioms. Okay but it's a scientific
view of rationality. But you started
asking me if it was a loose way of
understanding the language. I was more
interested in the scientific part. So you
have a scientific view. Yes. But you on
the other side you took fear and used the
everyday version of it. So you didn't
have a scientific approach to fear. You
had an everyday version of fear. Well yes
and no in the sense that after I changed
the axioms and I said golly when you
have catastrophic events, real events at
that terrible you need to use the topology
of fear. Different axiom, different
results, different rationality. And he
says okay but with respect to fear you're
still woosy woosy. You're not giving me
the scientific version. Right. And he's
right. I don't know what fear is. What I
do know is that I have carried experiments
in which people are subject to
propositions that inspire extreme fear
to see whether they behave according to
the axioms and the logic from those
axioms using the topology of fear will
imply. And the answer is yes so far
because you can never prove anything with
experiments. You can only prove that you
don't know that you have made a mistake.
But if you don't define fear you can't
scientifically use it. No what I do is I
define the topology of fear as a topology
that takes into consideration as a value
focuses on extreme acts. The words that can
happen. And that topology then gives
rise through to a different axiom through
logics to different behavioral patterns. I
check them. I tested them experimentally
with a team in France but this is baby
stuff compared to yours. Well you know I
think the I have a problem with fear
myself. So. You're afraid? Of snakes yes
but that's not the problem. The problem
is I'm afraid of what we've been calling
fear for hundreds or maybe thousands of
years. And I've gotten really hung up on
the question of how everyday language
relates to the scientific language
especially in emotion and fear. Because I
think we've made a lot of mistakes. And
in my own work I've made mistakes as
well. So I've studied how rats detect and
respond to threats for 30 years and have
called the brain systems that we've
identified the fear system. And I think
that's a mistake. So I'm publicly
announcing my my errors here. I think you
should still buy his book. By the next
one. Explain this. Which book you can give
us a title? It's called anxious. Anxious.
But it's a it'll be a while yet. Still
working. So anyway so the by studying the
way the brain detects and respond to
danger. We've identified circuits that
are very important and ultimately in
fear. But they're not fear circuits. And
for many years when I've been introduced
to give lectures I've been introduced to
someone who's discovered X, Y, and Z about
how we feel fear. And nothing could be
further than the truth. So I'm trying to
backtrack a bit and look at what we mean
by fear. And I'd like to just describe
you know how you go about the science of
doing something like this. Take a couple
of minutes to do that. So in you know
for studying the psychology and its
relation to the brain psychology of fear
into relation to the brain. We have to
first define identified the everyday
experience that we're interested in.
That's basically what we do in psychology.
Paul is interested in reward. So that's
an everyday concept. And he turns that
into some kind of scientific approach.
So you first define what you're
interested in fear. And you say well fear
is an emotion. And it's different from
other things that we call mental states
like conditions or thoughts. And it's
different from other emotions like
sadness and anger and empathy and so
forth. It's closer to anxiety. Maybe
that's kind of a topological relationship
in some sense. And in fact I think mostly
what you were talking about is anxiety
rather than fear. But we'll get to that in
a minute. So you've identified the
you've defined the thing that you're
interested in. And then you figure out
some experimental way to study some
aspect of that. So I've done that by
studying the way the brain detects and
responds to danger. Now when you do the
the experiment your goal is not only to
study the little thing that you're
modeling but also the bigger thing that
you want to make you want to gain some
clarity on the bigger picture that you
started out with fear. And so these two
processes of defining and researching
often go hand-in-hand. So over the last
hundred and fifty years or so when that
fear has been studied in various ways
it's gone through a lot of transformations.
The first approach has been to start with
the everyday experience. Darwin talked
about fear as a state of mind that's
evolved. Freud talked about fear and as
a conscious experience it might be
turned into an unconscious or repressed
state. William James talked about it. And
then the behaviorist came along and said
well this all this talk about consciousness
is getting in the way of doing research.
So let's talk about fear as a
disposition to act in a certain way. And
then a little bit later that was
turned into something called an
intervening variable. So the behaviorist
talked about observable events like
stimuli and responses. A behaviorist
Carl Toman introduced the intervening
variable which is something that sits
between the stimulus and the response but
has no psychological or biological
reality. So fear in that sense was a
concept that relates an external event
with an observable response. It wasn't a
real thing. It wasn't a fear in the
sense of a psychological experience. It
was just in a variable that explains how
certain stimuli give rise to responses.
The next step was these got turned into
hypothetical constructs. So the
hypothetical construct of fear was a
one of the main idea was as a drive. So
it was a drive that when reduced
eliminated the the aversive state that
you're experiencing. And then this became
turned into a biological entity certain
kinds of states of the brain. Now the
original ideas that were coming along
when people talking about brain states
of fear were in something called the
conceptual nervous system because they
didn't know enough about the details of
the brain to talk about the real nervous
system. So again it was all
hypothetical. It wasn't a real thing. But
then finally research on brain circuits
came along and we were able to identify
circuits of fear. And now that those
circuits have come along to explain how
the brain detects and responds to danger
something else has happened. Those
circuits you know all of this effort has
been to not talk about the not talk
about fear as a psychological state as
we're studying animals and we wanted to
be able to understand how the stimulus
produces the response without having to
assume anything about the psychology of
what that animal might be experiencing.
But then once you have the circuit the
circuit starts to be psychologicalized
into a fear circuit. So that circuit is
also generating the feeling of fear which
people who are studying those circuits
never really say. So all of this is a
long way of saying we have a lot of
problems in starting with a psychological
concept like fear and getting back to
how the brain is working but then coming
back to understanding the psychological
concept. And I think there's a way to do
that. What we have to do is first
distinguish what is that psychological
concept from one of the underlying things.
And I'll just wrap up by saying that
every organism whether it's a bacterial
cell or a human has to be able to detect
and respond to danger. It doesn't need to
feel fear to do that. Even in a human
brain the brain can detect and respond to
danger without building the stimulus is
there and without having any experience
at all. So what the organism is doing
whether it's a bacteria or a human is
detecting and responding to a threat. And
somewhere in the course of evolution when
the brain acquires the capacity to be
consciously aware of its own activities
you have the feeling of fear that comes
along or the feeling of anxiety or love
or whatever else. So I think we have to
distinguish the feelings. I think that
the everyday language is the way we
should think about states like fear and
anxiety and love and so forth. And that
the scientific way of thinking about
these things has to explain where that
comes from but without assuming that
it's the same thing as the scientific
stuff that we're studying. I don't know if
that makes any sense at all but it's...
This is fascinating. One thing I wanted to say is that as we start a new geological period on planet Earth
the the anthroposphere in which humans are
dominating the planet the notion of fear or rather as he points out
the threats. He's saying just let's talk about threats okay we are not clear what
we mean by fear or do we need to have an emotion
but the response to threat is what we're talking about.
Well we do have fear we experience it but
that's not what the brain... the brain
circuits that detect threats do not exist in the brain to make you feel
afraid. They make you... they're in the brain to allow you to detect threats.
So let's back off and say instead of fear let's talk about the response to
threats and then I'm saying what he used a
keyword evolution. It turns out that the brain
is like an automobile that has pieces of all sorts of primitive material like
bicycles and monosycles and until it gets to a modern automobile
we have all these pieces and they're loosely connected with each other in
some way or another that we somehow understand but the point that he's
making is if we made it so far he's because somehow
we relate we we reacted to threats and what I'm saying is and we are in a
position now where emotions may be evolving as the threats are evolving
because in the anthropocene this new geological period that started in 1945
we are facing totally different threats so the response to threat which is what
he says is the only thing I can be clear about which is what the brain
is doing. It's now something that is evolving because the
threats are completely different. We used to be afraid of our survival
in nature as other animals where our predators
were it is nature who has to be afraid of us now
so we have other fears the fears of what we ourselves
may be going to do so this evolution of emotions
is you know I think leading a lot of people to think well
are emotions reasonable good should they orient our actions
or not and to the extent that the response to threat is an emotion and I
don't even know if it is an emotion. It's not I would say no. There it is.
Let's get the other people in the discussion. Paul what do you think?
I'm trying to jump in right there. Gretel I'm struggling a little bit with
understanding the relationship to topology
and I mean I heard what Joe said very clearly which is
maybe we aren't talking about fear maybe we're talking about the way
organisms respond to threats and I understand when I put on my hat as an
economist being both an economist and a neuroscientist
I'm very sympathetic to the classical economist definition of rationality
that people are consistent that they follow some set of rules
or maybe even an economist would say a human behavior is maximizing something
that we have goals that we perceive towards these are all alternative
ways to say the word rationality. So it seems to me the classic story is
if I'm afraid my behavior is discontinuous across this boundary where
I become afraid and my behavior stops being rational and
goal-directed and progression and consistent and become something else
disordered dysfunctional and it seems to me that the
core of the argument here is that you found a way
to say well maybe that's not true maybe this is one thing and I was wondering
if you could elaborate for me a little bit more for all of us a little bit more
about topology and how it does that how it takes a
discontinuous disordered behavior and reveals it not to be discontinuous
disordered or unproductive.
I did not introduce Paul so I didn't know the introduction of anybody else so I
didn't tell you how great these people are but you probably understand
already how they are clarifying things and cutting things down to size.
Okay Paul yes the rationality is defined through maximums with logical
deductions. I'm saying if I change the actions
and I keep the rationality scheme which is using
a logical deduction I will get to explain actions
that were considered to be discontinuous and irrational before and you are
asking me explain how. Well I were given some intuition
for topologies role in that. Maybe I can say something.
What topology is all about is in some ways
defining what continuity is about because when you say something is
continuous you want to say that if I move if I don't move too far and I'm
measuring something that's happening out there it's not moving too far or
I'm looking at my results and if these results
are close together what people do what whether it's an economic
model whether it's biological model whether it's a physical model
I move a little bit that came from stimuli that were
close together and that is what continuity
really means and to say that it's discontinuous
says that well if I have nearby things here
the events that they create can be very far apart.
So you come down to the idea of what's nearby and so how do
so if you want to if you change the topology
about saying what are your nearby things you can turn
what seems in this model to be discontinuous
because those things that you start close they got far apart here when you're
measuring them this way but when you change the topology you
change what's nearby here they become closer together
so that and Graciela's example about weather for example
if you just say things are nearby if they have nearby
averages then you're going to have this big discontinuities
if you say okay when are things nearby they're nearby
if the average temperature over the year is nearby
and their extremes are also close together
things are different if they have very different extremes
well then you have a different model and what's continuous one one model can be
discontinuous in another model and so I think that
it's very this idea of saying topology and fear
you're taking different kinds of words that we're all used to using in different
contexts I mean this is part of what you were saying how do we use these
words and I think that if you want if you're trying to set up
some kind of model that you can work with you do have to
make these words have definite meetings in the context of what you're talking
about so fear when we talk about the topology of fear
we're talking about certain ways of measuring things if we change the ways
of measuring things then maybe different things are
closer together or not but it's very hard to take a very
amorphous concept of fear talking about it this way
and then here's your model and so you know you want to make the model it
kind of reflects the things that you really are interested in
I mean that's what people do when they try to set up mathematical models you
try to find the things that you're really interested in
and use those as the building blocks for your model
and build those into your axiom system so that
you get out things that you can predict from otherwise why do you want a model
so far does that be?
Helps on them let me bounce it back and you tell me
if I got enough to really grab on to that
I mean when I hear you say continuity the three of us are probably all
immediately thinking about the mathematical term continuity and it
may have slightly different meanings to different people in the room
but what I hear saying is if we look at a change in the environment and a
change in behavior we say oh look you know the environment's getting a
little bit riskier and people are getting changing
their behavior a little bit change it a little more they change it a little more
change it a little bit more suddenly you make a little change and
the behavior looks completely different so I think to me as an
economist and nurse scientist that's discontinuous right yeah oh sure and
so I had this problem which was that the thing I was manipulating the risk
looked continuous to me and the behavior looked discontinuous to me which left
me kind of like oh well that's not good and I'm hearing you say that the
critical idea here is well when you see discontinuous behavior
that doesn't line up with what you think is a continuous state of the outside
world maybe you're looking at the outside world wrong
maybe there there's a lens that makes the outside world
either look discontinuous or flip the other way makes the behavior look
continuous right yeah in fact to be very specific
you as I said by using different polo you are using different values
so something that you in example I gave before
your value is on average you want to be as well as you can when you invest
your money that's the way you value an investment
an investment approach but then all of a sudden
there is a small probability that this here there will be a market crash
under the average response which is what you were saying
and you were saying you will just you know
neglect the market crash you will deny a market crash
and you will dive into the market crash which is what happens to us
so you're not looking at the worst that can happen
that would not be your behavior if you're using the normal
the polishing under the polishing of fear it doesn't matter to you how small is
the probability of the event if it is bad enough you're going to
focus on it really hard and then through these results
I give a complete characterization that tells you how
the human behavior the russian human behavior in corporate instead two parts
incorporates I want to be on average as well as I can
so I like the temperature to be on average 70 degrees
but I'm going to also mind if there is a jump of 100 degrees from one day to the
next I can't deal with it so I'm going to look at those two
things and that leaves you to totally different
behavior and not to look at the average temperature
if you don't look at the average temperature you look irrational
according to that criteria and it goes you know
this can be made very very very precise mathematically as precise as you want
so in the case of a market crash we might have avoided the market crash
if the people in Wall Street instead of using the economics of averages
which is the standard of unemployment theory they would have used the economics
of reacting to a threat which is what I call the topology of fear
and that leads to a decision criterion or function
in which the words that can happen all of a sudden may pop up
whoa we can go into a crash whoa stop break change behavior is that
discontinuous well it would be if you're just doing
a damages but if you're looking at the words that can happen it
wouldn't be this continuous so the notion of rationality which is tied up with
continuity as Linda says depends on how you measure things what your
values are what you what you observe what you care for
does it make sense yeah David why don't you know
and then there's a great deal that's been said already that in terms of
psychoanalysis raises a number of interesting
questions but just this last point about continuity and discontinuity and about
flipping the topology of the response so as to find a continuity where it
appears that there's a discontinuity is a position that one experiences as a
psychoanalyst all the time that is one of the things that takes place
in listening very closely to the discourse of a patient
is linked is one hears or finds links
proximities continuities where it appears there are discontinuities
in the content that's being talked about there also for example things which
may seem highly unrelated on the face of them on the surface
through further discourse you begin to see how they are in fact linked
so you you find unexpected continuities unexpected proximities
right on the level of meaning for example
a person is to associate a little bit he will show you exactly
if you free associate he'll give you an example yeah
we're already using a couch but people are speaking about one topic
in what appears to be a clear rational
depiction of some story and suddenly they have a thought
and they say I don't know where this comes from it's got nothing to do with
what i'm talking about right but under the
structure of a psychoanalytic treatment which is that you say whatever comes
into your mind they say this thought that's random
that seems completely unconnected as they speak about it
and it happens this is a daily event this is not an unusual event in psychoanalytic
work at all as they speak about it of two or three
minutes into things of course i see why i thought about this
it happens to us all all the time we have an association which seems entirely
discontinuous and we discover the continuity
right i mean how do you know it's a real continuity
as opposed to one that's interpreted without any interpretation
now the question there of course is what do you mean by real
content i mean that is a question it's more about how this gets back to the
sides of the well the way it gets back and
uh is that it has to do with the the level of analysis
you know each of us work in a different framework of analysis
but uh what's of interest to the psychoanalysts is subjective
reality its subjective experience is not just
the description but the articulation of subjective experience putting it into
language conveying it to another person so
the continuity is real by virtue of the subjective experience
what its reality is in terms of other criteria is another question
so in my field we have something called memory
reconsolidation where you take a memory out as as you do in
psychoanalysis examine it and what we and others have found is that when
memories are are taken out in this way and made in
in a made active they go to a period of vulnerability where they can be
changed and then restored and the new reality becomes what's restored
rather than what the original reality was
and so a common example is someone witnesses a crime
and gives a report to the police on the day of the crime
and then they go to court to testify and rather than talk about the details
they gave the police they come up with details that were in a newspaper
article that they read in the meantime so reading that article reactivated the
memory caused new information to be stored and then that becomes the
reality that they carry forth as the next memory
so the you know the extreme version of this is your memory is only as good as
your last memory and that's that is an extreme version but
there's some truth okay i have to say something directly
related to that uh and to uh poll was saying mathematically
when you have when you have
the foundation of how we observe reality is probability and statistics
that's how we observe things we measure things and we take
statistics okay that's we look at statistics of what
you don't see one option you you look at statistics of it
now these same axioms of are using the extreme
at events lead to a different probability and statistics
which when you look at the stochastic processes that they generate
when you have a probability function and you pull out
uh you pull balls from an urn that has a different distribution
then you plot how many were red how many were black etc that gives you
a stochastic process that's what it's called and the prices of the stock in
wall street also are a stochastic process
the observations of particles in the universe are also a stochastic process
etc well if you take these axioms and you put
the topology of fear and derive the stochastic process that occur
they are not random walks and they are not smooth diffusion processes
they are diffusion processes with jumps that's a theorem
now what you are saying and what you are saying is you observe a person
talking about an event and all of a sudden they make a jump
which is discontinuous which you say unrelated
well there is a theorem coming from these axioms that says
that's the way it is they will be market charges
they will be discontinuities on the second analytic chair and they will
the discontinuities are the rule not the exception
but they are not really discontinuities when you take into account
the value system or the topology of fear that is underlying this form of
rationality they are what you expect to be
in fact you prove they are going to be jump diffusion processes
that's why the mass in the universe is not uniformly distributed that's why
you have stars so you have nothing for a while and then you have
you know jumps in mass that's why people in the couch
all of a sudden come up with something strange but could you predict what
the patient is going to come up with you can predict the
frequency in which they will occur you can predict
the form that this probability distribution takes
and then you can carry experiments about it and
that gives rise to a new form of probability and statistics
and it reproduces what what happens for example with earth quakes
I just want to add a dimension to that
and in so doing bring it back to the question of emotion and to the question
of fear and threat because that your argument I think is that fear
introduces a particular form of discontinuity
which can be accounted for by a topological structure which will
match the values of that new form of discontinuity
what I'd like to suggest that the discontinuities are only apparent
yet so it seems to me though that there
there is something about you know
you it's not clear that fear it I mean it works maybe in this context but
there are a lot of situations people are building now these huge
supercomputers and they've got thousands of computers that they put
together and they know as these things go they generate
heat you know they're going to generate heat so you know that this one is going
to fail and you have to program them in such a way
that when this one fails this one is taking over
and so that people when you're looking at the output it all looks very
continuous because you don't see that this one
stopped and that one started but in fact
there was this jump now this is and all of this
has nothing to do with the emotions this is because people have thought about
well how are you going to deal with situations where you know
something's going to get hot you don't know which one's going to get hot
you don't know when you have some sense of mean time to failure but
you try to build this in to the system and
but this is not an emotionally charged situation where you're dealing with
some kinds of discontinuities and so you try to create models where you think
this is going to work and in that sense you create
topologies which are measuring what's going on
and there is something similar to that in terms of you're saying
you have a topology you want to create a topology that takes
these what seem to be rationalities when we put it in the context of the market
as discontinuities and make them into a situation where you can
know what to expect so that you know you know how to react to them you know
that the market that you can make a situation where you're in good shape
so the so is using the word fear throwing in
an emotional charge into the discussion commensor
and you agree with him because he said well i just you know i just he's saying
it's not really fear it's like the there is a systematic way in which we
respond to threat and we better know how to do that because otherwise we
wouldn't be here and that's what it is and you may or
not feel fear right and so there is no role for the
emotion no the once once you've detected a threat
and it invades your consciousness then it's a whole new game then that's when
fear is there and begins to act back on the the whole system
and everything changes i i work in the first 15 milliseconds
of stimulus so that's what i'm trying to understand
but you know by the time that you have the awareness of something
obviously it's a whole new ball game so you will say the reaction to threat
in the first few milliseconds is what it is no fear no emotion it's just a
reaction to threat and then eventually the brain picks up
oops it realizes what's happening it's observing itself
and then it feels fear right there's another step though so
the the brain first detects first we react to danger so you're walking
along there's a snake on the ground you stop and then you realize there's a
snake right because your brain is detected it or you're walking down the
street you jump back and the bus goes flying by
so you're able to the bus the bus so our car whatever taxi so
your brain is able to identify these these stimuli that are potentially
dangerous uh and and allow you to react in hardwired pre-programmed ways
now once that's happened that changes the state of the brain so that you
become more sensitive to threatening stimuli
you you have goal-directed behaviors that begin to be called upon through
past learning and and so forth that allow you to then
perform instrumental or willful behaviors that help you cope with the situation
not necessarily consciously but then at the same time you're beginning to
become consciously aware of everything and then that will also impact as well
so we can think of like three levels here and then once
you're conscious of it then it's a whole nother ballgame where
you know you're consciously planning things and you may say that that's
a complete artifact as well there could be a topology going on that's making
predictions about what the next step is going to be in
consciousness is a total epiphenome i don't think that's true
but we certainly don't understand what consciousness is and how it works
one question are emotions good or bad they're both
so how do we know whether we should yield to our emotions or not
well first of all you can't i'm just asking a simple question
i mean you wait in terms of your reaction you can't stop that i mean first you're
gonna react and then you may you know you may short circuit it but it starts
uh and then that's what will determine whether you
continue to respond or not and you may not even be able to stop it
but if we develop emotions as part of this process of coping and observing
etc and rationalizing what happens when we react to threat
and now in the Anthropocene threats have changed
are there were emotions changing different threats different emotions
depends on what you mean by emotions i mean it's you know it's it's all about
defining what the terms are i think the you know i think David was in the middle
of something when we got off track so maybe we should go back to that
well it relates to your question and and it's to introduce another
uh term in the question of decision-making and that is the notion of desire
because it seems to me relevant that in making a decision the subject is not
simply engaging in a rational calculation of
advantage and disadvantage the subject also
experiences something about a fantasy a wish
an idea of what the consequence of success
will be um as part of subjective life one
continuity one proximity that is very striking
is that very close to the experience of desire
is the experience of threat
yes i'm using the topological i'm using the topological idea that is
that is whereas we might think that nothing could be more discontinuous or
further apologize to the experience of
the first thing that is that is
think that nothing could be more discontinuous or further apart
as for example someone speaks about a wish that they have
and they begin to articulate the nature of that wish a wish for some
outcome some behavior some activity to take place
as they articulate more and more about that wish including unexpected
elaborations about that wish what often takes place is an experience of some
kind of inhibition something stopping them
they stop i can't go on i can't really say more
about this to talk about what you want to talk about your desire freely
is a very difficult thing to do something takes place something
related to what i think joe is talking about as as a threat
responds to threat pre-conscious the desire is a response to threat
no no in talking about desire in articulating desire
we observe a response to threat in the form of of of some kind of an
inhibition some kind of a stopping some kind of a difficulty
right going at are you saying anything more than
if you want to put ten thousand dollars in
grass yellow spond and you think grass yellow is gonna give you
three thousand dollars more by the end of the year so you'll have 13 000 so your
desire is to change your ten thousand into 13 000
then you have the idea what if grass yellow doesn't succeed and i lose my
money is that what you mean by desire and threat
no because that that i mean that that's a very rational you know what you're
worried about there well now i'm talking about the more
and it's a garden variety i think we all experience it you think
i have a good chance of doubling my money in this investment
but there's something about that that bothers me there's something i
you know what i'm not i'm not sure i can actually
bring myself to act on that knowledge it's an inhibition
why do people get in their own way why do what i would suggest is this
happens constantly this happens in daily life
this isn't a rare event under extreme conditions so you're afraid of what you
want i think people are generally afraid of what they want
now in post-traumatic stress disorder
isn't it doesn't it come up in some cases where you associate something that you
want very much with something which is a tremendous
threat to you like what i mean what do you mean
well let's look at the case of domestic violence
so you are in love with his man and one day he tried to kill you
and then out of that you have this association you love this person that
is all these warmth and these wonderful feelings
but then all of a sudden you relay that with the worst possible experience
which is that your life may be at stake in a horrible way
so you're describing to describing the person's
subjective conscious experience but underneath that are going to be
approach and avoidance tendencies that have been conditioned by those
experiences so there may be some uh you know some very good times that
created positive relationships stimuli associated with that person that
are attractive and appealing but also the very negative things
they're going to be pulling you in the other direction
so these are these are the kinds of things they're going to be triggering
these implicit unconscious processes every time you encounter that person
uh and you know which one wins probably the
adversity is it is uh it's going to win in every situation
because but Joe the what you were saying seems to me would make sense
if uh the example wasn't grads yellow's example because grads yellow's example
is that your actual life is being threatened it's not that
you say you know he's a nice guy because he buys me nice presence
but whenever he comes home for dinner he starts yelling and screaming
that's uh when you were talking about an extreme example like
she's talking about how would you justify remaining with somebody who
actually is threatening your life and he's saying there would be natural
because what you most desire is also what you're most afraid of
not really saying that
i wouldn't put it that simply in in in the sense that it's in all cases
all i'm saying is that there is an unexpected proximity
in the sense that uh you were talking about it topologically there's an
unexpected proximity between threat and desire unexpected by what we might
think of as a an ordinary topology but the topology
that that a psychoanalyst comes to work with
is the expected proximity of threat and desire
i can give you a research example that i think helps to address this question
um one of my colleagues Regina Sullivan uh has studied
rat pups and at a very early age while the pups are still
nursing um pups what's pups maybe pups maybe rats
nursing with the mother um a stimulus that's associated with the mother
but uh is also connected to to a painful experience
in the pup uh the the the pup will treat that stimulus
as a positive stimulus so it's as if you know the mother may be abusive
but the pup is dependent on them on the mother so the connections formed are
still in the positive approach uh vein but as soon as the the pup stops
nursing um the those same stimuli now become
aversive and the pup will avoid those under any circumstance
now that okay that's fine but then in the adult you can bring back
this infant uh attraction by stress so raising cortisol levels in
the adult rat will bring back the infantile pattern
of approaching the dangerous harmful stimulus
so to the extent that PTSD is often something that
uh a person doesn't just develop PTSD after one stress in life often it's
something where one has been traumatized as a child
and then that sensitizes the brain to to later stress
you can imagine how the same kind of mechanism would kick in
wow
so essentially what he's saying is that masochism is cortisol
well the the topology actually is uh
it's actually doing a lot of work for us here because it's telling us
again values in some cases what you really care for but also
in reality what things are close to which i mean it's really
it's uh i mean i there is no question that
it really depends on the topology we use depends on the way we're wired
but also our culture certain things in our culture are considered to be
similar and that topology that proximity is
completely
hard wire i mean there's no particular reason for it
uh i was going to give examples but i want to create anything to
uh difficult to comprehend but what you're saying is very interesting for that
i mean i think was agreeing with what you said about desire
and uh well so what i was saying out of that was that
we can put a topology on emotions that our
measure two two emotions are close together if they
both make you feel relatively good or if they both make you feel
relatively bad and we sort of tend to think of
um being happy is on the way to being ecstatic which is
sort of closer than being in great fear or
being terribly sad and i think what you're saying is that
off if you change your idea of what the topology is
and you say we put emotions together it would say that they're close if they
occur at the same time or in close
prux you know if you see within a given individual
these emotions occurring simultaneously then maybe that's
when you say these should be close so that's a different topology that you
can put on emotions saying that these are these are close together
because they occur often together as opposed to having
that they're far apart because they have
uh you know they seem far apart about what they make people feel
from it
Paul did you get the response to the question you have?
I think so i mean i i understand a little bit more this notion of
what you mean by topologically consistent and i mean i think
the discussion here has really focused on how emotions are topologically
consistent how they that might align with the topology of
fear and the topology of efficient decision-making
i'm not exactly sure how these two sets of ideas the one psychological
about topology and the other economic basically about topology
exactly align and i see joe chafing constantly at the border between those
two ideas but what about reward prediction error
which is something you study i mean that's a discontinuity
i'm sorry i didn't hear you yeah did you know did i want to go there?
i don't want to go there i don't know if that's true
but if you have a something that's being predicted and that
prediction is not coming true and that's triggering
you know i mean i i view that as a very continuous process because i'm thinking
well i'm expecting to find a full glass of water and i find only half
a glass of water so i'm surprised negatively by half
i mean these are you know little things that you learn from
don't expect whatever but i know what she's talking about
but i i don't i don't see those as discontinuous at all
i mean those map and normal topologies those are just straight linear spaces
i i mean i don't want to descend into mathematics here but
i think this is something really different
well i have a question about topology that maybe Linda can answer
the model that some psychoanalysts use to map the space
where these unexpected continuities occur is
uh it can be talked about in a variety of one of them is the cross cap
the project the real projective plane yeah
the self-intersecting plane yeah right
um just does that make sense to you as a topological model
related to the questions that we're talking about
here
I guess for my my sense thinking about that kind of model is
that
what is special about it is
that it's an example of something that is not orientable
so the simplest example of that is the Mobius strip
where you take a piece of paper like this and then you
want to glue the ends together and you glue it like this and the thing is that
you can keep going around it it has only one side right i think
what you're saying more about this question of
proximities that you don't expect to find is
that you have a situation where you're looking at
this global question of dealing with these emotions and trying to see how they
fit together and they're sitting it's more like a surface that comes around
and meets itself it's not the question of orientability
that is what characterizes cross cap but the idea that you have something
that what we call in mathematics is immersed
rather than embedded that you have you have a surface that comes around and
intersects itself it comes out and then it comes around it might
intersect itself again in some other kind of
special place so it's more this question of
the fact that you have self-intersections and
immersibility as opposed to embedibility in terms of the
mathematical technical terms for yeah that is a great
image of those modes of intersection called singularities yes
it's a very evocative term for a psychoanalyst
i mean you know if you the simplest kind of
thing is you know if you take a curve that you grow on the plane that comes
around and intersects itself in one point
well you can write down equations for surfaces where
the surface lives in a bigger space because there are more variables but
then they intersect in a whole line or in bigger and even bigger
pieces and sometimes it does it in a nice way and sometimes it does it in a
very not very nice way and there are lots of theories to think about these
various singularities and see how they come about
but you think also is that sometimes the opposite
speaks and that's what you were saying with this type of emotions i mean the
extreme desire and extreme fear or feeling of threat
meat but the only thing i would say that
somewhat differs from your position is that i find that this is
occurs all the time i don't think it's a rare
event i think in decision-making all the time
there are these singularities these conjunctions of opposites these
unexpected i agree all right what i'm saying is that
when you look at it from a conventional approach
you like this and you dislike a threat okay they're separate and what you're
saying is no don't expect them to be separate expect them to
converge and in mathematics expect them to come together all the time
and they do and i agree with that and that leads to a totally different types of
type of mathematics and you can predict different things
for example believe it or not you can predict some things that's happening
quantum probability using this type of mathematics
that you couldn't predict otherwise and and maybe that we should be using one of
those because the quantum probability scheme
that is also the biological connects with the issue of frameworks and i
don't understand why since i call ushists or understand that we think in
frameworks those two fields have not been
closer together
did i say something wrong i don't know
yeah i think i'd like to just go back to the the basic question of
a fear versus anxiety because i i think most of the stuff you talked about in
your example would fall into the category of what scientists call
anxiety more than fear
so the typical scientific definition is fear is
a state that occurs when there's an immediately present threat so like the
snake on the ground whereas anxiety is one where you're
anticipating a threat now by that definition though
really almost everything that we call fear is anxiety because
it's usually not you know the snake itself but the
what what you're what's you know there's nothing about the snake that's
inherently dangerous it's the you're worried that the snake is
going to bite you so all of that is becomes anxiety
um now one way to to look at these things is in terms of
what's called predatory imminence um this is a theory that michael
phanslow ucla is advanced and he has a scale of uh different degrees of
temporal and spatial proximity that determine uh how a rat is going to
respond to a particular threat or any other organism
so if the stimulus if the threat is like immediately
in front of you uh then you have you you will freeze
if it's a little bit further away um you will freeze but sort of be
engaging in uh what's called risk assessment kind of head bobbing and
moving back and forth but when you're frozen you're just
dead solid no movement at all but if the threat is further away you're kind of
checking it out if the threat is very far away you might
just run away because that's uh the best thing to do if if you have
the opportunity to escape and if it's really far away and
is not even visible then you know there's no response at all
even though it may be potentially present so
an animal that is um is hungry for example he's what hungry
we'll have to overcome certain concerns every time he goes out of the the
nest and into the world there's a chance there's a probability that he's
going to be eaten but uh he knows what's going on in his
local area so he's going to take that chance to go find something to eat
uh so there's no threat present but he has to be vigilant just in case but he's
going to still perform the behaviors he needs to unless the threat is actually
detected at some distance and depending on how close it is the uh
the way it will respond to be different so it seems that maybe that's just too
simple mud in terms of topology but it seems that there's a
topological relationship between what the animal is going to do
and uh what it expects and so forth that is a very good example
yeah okay i think we can go to questions yeah
i think there is a couple of questions here
they have to be questions they don't have to be statements and long comments
great questions please
let me refer i did have a comment that was going to turn into a question so
let me rephrase it uh i think uh joseph mentioned as
Paul did later on but you were very explicit that one of the issues here
is definition of terms so i went the question i have for
Linda i think at first um in topological space especially
mathematical top uh topology uh the notion of
continuity versus a continuous versus discrete transformation
is very very precise so i think the whole idea of discontinuity here
was used in a context that strays from a strip topological
uh interpretation so i wanted to ask you that uh and i'm quite
understanding well in that um if one if if if you're talking about for
example the uh transforming the topology uh based on certain axioms
into a second topology based on different axioms
if that's a continuous transformation that's one thing
if there's separate type of topologies it's something else
yeah so right so i think basically what she's defining is a separate
okay it's not it's not that it's not that you're making a continuous
transformation from one topology to another yeah yeah yeah no
and then the since that's cleared up the question i have for you specifically
would if you have looked into or think that looking into
um abelian lee groups would have any traction in this context
and i break i bring that up because of its relationship to quantum mechanics
and that lee groups have been shown to um be very useful in probabilistic
interpretations of quantum events yeah so i'm actually bresiella can probably
answer that better than i can because she has worked with
mathematics of those models so she would know better weather
you really how you how you use the abelian yeah but they would kick me out of
here if i started talking about that but yes i mean
if you everything they were saying is very very close to quantum
probability by that among other things you have different frameworks in which
you look at things now when you do have that and you
transform one framework into another that is a group of transformations
that gives rise to either abelian or non-abelian groups
oh very good okay so then i'll talk to you later about
the relationship of min max uh to that statement
wow that i i don't know it's like linda said
they are not connected i mean typically speaking what you do there is you
transform if a basis of coordinates into another
and you're not using min max no but in terms of the topological
representation of the two different uh state spaces that's what i put not now
thanks hi i'd like to ask if you could define
embedded versus immersed and if there is a an analogy in both psychoanalysis and
in the work show that you do this question only in new york city
i was an amazing question okay so it's um if i have a surface that's embedded
it will intersect itself if i have if i have a curve
i mean it's easier to think about a curve that comes back
and crosses itself if it crosses but i can think of it as a curve because it
makes sense to follow it around right so when i follow it around like
shoelace and i go to tie it that's where it crosses itself
if it fuses together if it doesn't come together
if it's if if when i follow it around it never touches itself it's embedded
very simple
okay so your necklace isn't bad if it doesn't come together
actually but yeah i can do it doesn't you're right
but is there an analogy in the sense that when you start thinking about
emotions that are close together in terms of say the way they make you feel
or and you start going through moving through
emotions that are close together and then these are
would somehow feel very far apart but in terms of their occurrence within the
space they come together again as in feeling good
and then feeling fearful and so you've made this transition through these
various different emotions and you come together and all of a sudden there you
are in the same place yeah i'll i'll give you one other
example uh it has to do with the notion of transference
in psychoanalysis transference yeah the notion of transference
it to put it very simply is that an event taking place
can be simultaneously meaningful in two
points of time two points of time i.e. a memory and an encounter in the present
can be at that moment experienced as a simultaneous event
so there is exactly the kind of so you've gone from when it happened before
through some period of time and now you experience it again
and so it is in the but it feels like so you're in the same point from the
point of event but a different point in time yeah and that is
transference in psychoanalysis you know defined topologically
so from the neurobiological point of view that what you just described is
the you know when we scientifically we think of
being able to attend or be conscious of a particular thing in our mind
means that that information is in what's called working memory
so maybe you first had one state one of these states in working memory
or the other but now they're both in working memory so they're simultaneous
but in terms of you know so-called emotions whether you can have two
emotions at one time in terms of the biological
underpinnings of emotion is i don't think we we know the answer but
you know if we think of for example
what what these states do let's say you're in a state that's been triggered by
the presence of a threat it begins to monopolize your brain because it
takes over causes you know this is a survival situation
so your brain is now in a state where everything has to be dedicated
to survive the moment so that's why it's monopolizing so it would be hard for
another state to take over at that point unless it had some
greater priority so let's flip things around let's say you're really hungry
so the the nutrition energy balance system has taken over your brain
but um you know that there's a predator right out there where you've got to go
get your food so you're not going to go out you're
going to stay hungry for a while on the other hand
let's say you know the predator's there and you're still hungry and you're
really hungry you're on the point of starvation now so you have to risk
encountering the predator to get some food so these are uh
can be thought of as different points of monopolization that where the
states are almost uh discontinuous and switching back and forth
as needed on the momentary state
okay
frustrated by this idea of this this model this
topology which is is trying to be imposed on
something and it doesn't fit and well it seems to me that i've been
i was a computer programmer most of my life and i understand programs that
i understand programs that uh you know possibly predict to like which
where you're going to put your money you know if you're
a vase of uh you want to avoid too much risk and something like that you could
put it but it can't be just it isn't something simple
it's something very very complex you would have a case's well case
from from this age to this age or this you would have right a
very complicated program and and the complicated program
would have to follow the analysis and the input from the people who uh
were actually dealing with something real it's sort of like uh
uh science following observation and then uh people coming up with
uh this happens this time and this time and this time and then the theories
are evolve and uh when the after the theories evolve
something comes up that this that doesn't quite fit in so it's slightly
modified you modified the program slightly to fit it in and to me that's
what science is about it is i i find it very frustrating to think of
a topology uh that uh that's very vague and i don't know
what any practical use for it and and i don't see how it's going to
work you if you have a programmer programming
these decision tables interviewing every
uh analysis and you can i could set up a i believe i could set up
certain questions that therefore a individual patient and every person
would be different and they would have these different things that they would
be afraid of and when they wouldn't then you they would become very predictable
if you fit it into a program and then you could would test it to see if
if it would work and when it didn't work you would have to modify it
and but i don't understand i a an abstract philosophical
uh topology imposed somewhere or or where it isn't either
influenced by the underlying analysis and or experiments that would say
prove that this analysis of theory was wrong you have to start with the
observation observation of the rats or
observations of or much more complex observations of human beings by
analysts uh getting uh getting all this data and then you
come up with after the fact with a formula that would work i can't see
coming out starting with a formula and then
important from the outside first of all is a fascinating comment
fascinating from your experience to tell us that um but
let's look at the rat okay so the question is
you want to predict what's going to happen to the rat or he wants to predict
what's going to happen to the rat when he grows up
so he's not pursuing that i think what he's doing well you want to predict
no what your what what you can keep with the program
all the same rats when they were growing up
observe many of them see what happened to the ones who
be who had this experience and the ones that didn't have that experience
and then you then you do that after the fact what's your name
ready ready what the polish is doing is telling you
what to look at what to look at yeah what's important
okay and if you tell me that is a large philosophical theory that doesn't
matter that's not what the polish is telling you
what what matters is is the average behavior of the mother
or whether the mother at some point took a deep dive and did something
that have caused a big impact on the young brain
what matters more what you do on every day basis with a child
or what you do what you did once and that's extremely
so the same thing is through about a computer
programming yes you want to say you want to feed data
and then you want to see if the data is within this neighborhood i know this
is going to be the result but suppose that you say no what matters is
what's the minimum of all the numbers you feed and that's going to determine
whether it's going to go this way or it's going to flip
and your computer program so the question is what is important
are you testing for the correct thing is that yes
and therefore that is very crucial it's not
oh philosophical and that's what we're talking about
by topology by the way i take the opportunity to say that
i brought 15 copies of the article the topology of fear
if you want to read them they would be left i did not read it before so i'm sorry
no of course not but i mean they're sitting there
so in some sense it's really very fundamental because that's what science
is looking for patterns but i think like a psychology
it seems to me that psychologists are doing that they are coming up with
tests they're coming up with tests that it seems to me that
that's very anyway i don't i'm not going on
yeah thank you very thank you and i will read your
article thank you
why has anybody mentioned uncertainty which seems to me
uh the fundamental condition of human condition and
which to link what the psychoanalysts said
with what you were saying you've got your financial decision that
needs to be made and at the same time somebody has
a desire in both cases what's really an issue
is the uncertainty of the outcome that comes with our normal day in and day
out living and decision making we have to make
so that what what we're talking about and it really is the response to threat
as well because what is the threat we're responding to
we're responding to the threat of uncertainty because that's the way life
is we don't know what's happening from one
one second to the other psychoanalytically if somebody has a strong
desire it seems to me it's fairly natural to
also have fear associated with it because it's uncertain we don't know that
will come out it's not a matter of the
specific desire that we fear it's another aspect of it
that we know the uncertainty that we may encounter in reaching
in having that desire satisfied but again what
by basic point is what was missing in this whole discussion
was nobody talking about uncertainty and the fact that
in each and every case what you're really looking at
is we're here now and we're either perceiving threat perceiving concern
that's the future and that's where the uncertainty comes in
and let people answer it but we're going to have a round table on uncertainty
later in the year okay everything we said was about
uncertainty everything from the from the word go
when we started saying well you don't know what's going to happen with the
market conditions are you going to invest to get
the best possible expected return that's uncertainty
are you going to be afraid or and focus on the market crash
another form of uncertainty the question is how do you define uncertainty and
what do you focus on are you focused on on the average
uncertainty of the weather or are you focused on the maximum and the
minimum well you see but but this is where i get
my question regarding the the mathematical explanation
in the uh the topography and again a couple of times you alluded to
quantum mechanics okay and we know that quantum mechanics
the uncertainty principle and the idea of what you're trying to do
is predict probabilities mathematically but when we're talking about
i think the topic of human uncertainty we're talking again to go back to the
subjective the the individual trying to make their
own decision and all i can say at that point
i mean it is so much more complicated i think
than what we've said but you still got a look at it from the standpoint of the
individual and again each one of us has to face our future and we do it
every minute of our lives it's too bad Paul is not here
because that's exactly what he works on the way the brain is a Bayesian
statistical probability generator and how our decisions are based on these
probability estimates and incidentally what i wanted to talk with him but
is the Bayesian decisions or the Bayesian updating
which is that you have the belief and then you get a new piece of information
and you update your belief that's what Bayesian uh theory does
well how do you update your belief mathematically you updated so that they
know updated distribution that you adopt
uh minimize the errors given what you now know
and the minimization of error depends on
the topology do you want to minimize error on the average
or do you want to minimize the extremal errors it makes a completely
come a drastic difference to your Bayesian
optimization whether you want to minimize the worst possible error
or the average error so therefore you even then the the issue of the
the polish that you use makes a big difference and
your issues about the animals making decisions like that the frozen animal
making a decision are getting more information as you just said that's
making a Bayesian decision it starts sitting there
frozen and scoping up what is that Bayesian updating
right well is it scoping up for the average
of what the predator is going to be or for the worst possible thing that's
going to happen and is he going to react differently
and the answer is very differently and that's what the
topology of fear price of capture sorry so
let me give you a simple example take physics you drop a ball from a
tall building and you can predict by an equation how long it will take to
hit the ground however if at the same time you happen to have an earthquake
which is a rare event you get a different outcome the point of this is
trying to explain a bit more because i think people are not used to that
it's a very important example so so the point i'm trying to make it
really really are two complex systems involved here
there's the reality and then there's the brain and they both have this
phenomenon that they are capable of all the butterfly effect
of having a discontinuity that is a very small new piece of Bayesian input
will cause a drastic change in your updating of your information
so the question i have in the studies in the trying of
the notable effort and noble effort everybody's trying to do to try to put
this on a scientific basis there's some of the fundamental limitations
that come with it being a complex system and even more
fundamental when you have two interacting complex systems
that is the brain and the reality it's trying to deal with
so my question to the panel is how does one
simultaneously recognize that there's no fixed point here
that both the decision making apparatus that is perceiving the reality
has this capacity for a butterfly effect that is to have a discontinuity
and suddenly change its reaction instantaneously for very
incrementally small new piece of information
and the reality itself that it's trying to make a decision about
has that same basic property how does one
fix it how does one know how when this entangle where that extra little
input came from it was in your case because the person had an experience
in real life that was a butterfly effect it traumatized them
and it therefore made a fundamental change in how they're going to
subsequently react or was it something that the reality was
essentially continuous but something else that as you talk about in the
background suddenly made a fairly normal thing
cause a discontinuity in their brain how does one
disentangle those two things you go on there coupled
you know your question is related to the one before and i think it's about the
limits of knowledge and factoring the limits of knowledge
into your expectations and your schemas of analysis your theory of
rationality even to have built into it
that idea of you know an uncertainty factor an accidental factor
unpredictable factor it's a change in the position of
knowing right so there's one other comment in this it seems to me that
the thing that i always think about in this context
is that and i think that's what uh
residuals theory i think is useful in is that
if we walk around with an expectation of a continuous reality
with a machine that is inherently discontinuous in the way it functions
that will lead to some very incorrect analysis of what is going on how the
system is reacting and the way to compensate for that at
some level is what i call what is called commonly
metacognition that is to acknowledge in a feedback loop to yourself
that you are dealing with a series of discontinuities
and have some mechanism both scientifically and personally
in order to process and make your decisions that ask yourself that question
or is this new piece of information that is causing this discontinuity
something that i should be analyze and make a fundamental change or not
and therefore be able to somehow compensate for the fact that you know you
have two interacting circumstances that can expose you to these very rare
moments that could cause a very significant change in your reality
that's not particularly warranted but there are animals that have been
around since the uh you know earliest times of life on earth
that are so primitive they can't possibly have metacognition yet they've
adapted to these discontinuities pretty well
i don't think they have 99.9 percent of the species
bacteria for example
yeah because they do something and so they're the lifetime
so they've adapted to that okay that's not a that's not a mechanism
available to us and you are 90 bacterial DNA so don't stand there
talk against them okay next question um so i'm a
trauma psychiatrist that's how i make my living and i did read this paper
years ago and have thought about it for many years because i know graciolan
have taught this paper and i i sort of the comment i sort of do want to make a
comment follow-up question the comment is i think that this is a ground
breaking paper and the reason i think this is a ground breaking paper
is because it's very in some ways it has a very similar place in the history of
this kind of science to the famous paper by
by backer about rational addiction and what the paper by backer with rational
addiction did was to move the boundary of what is rational to show that i could
use purely axiomatic rational modeling to explain addiction
which broadened the concept of what rationality was
and shrunk the concept of what irrationally and emotionally driven things
one that he showed that you could actually mathematically and rationally
predict even something as unusual as it as addiction and i think graciolas
paper takes that even a step further and expands our notion of what is
rationality and what we mean by rationality is something to do with
consistency something to do with compute to
computability something to do with predictability
and those notions of rationality so i think it expands the very concept of
what we think is rational and what we have to think is and and therefore
there are it's actually less that we have to explain by this vague notion of
emotional and irrational and i think it really think it does
an amazing job of that but i think if you want to explain that paper you have to
sit down with a friend of yours who's a mathematician to read this paper trust
mail that way thank you
hi um i've got a quick question about how i raise this up
about the proximity of fear and desire so it's been suggested that because
these emotions oftentimes occur together that there might be some
tight-knit relationship between them so they should be close in our topological
map of these emotions but your that's what it is
your example um of the rat who's hungry for something that's in the same
area as a threat makes me think that the closeness
the the frequent reoccurrence of these emotions in tandem
might say more about the events than the actual proximity of those emotions
every event has multiple components some of which are good and some of which
are bad and it has multiple potential components some of which are good and
some of which are bad so you have different reward circuitry and
different fear circuitry and they might be activated at the same time
for the same event simply because there are different components to these
events if my fiance invites me to go to dinner with her parents i'm
afraid to act like an idiot and i'm also excited
so i just don't think that should inform our topology
of these emotions it might be the case that different events
can excite both of these emotions and i was wondering
you agree disagree well in order to answer that uh we would have to get into
the notion of desire and what i mean by that or what is meant by that in psycho
analysis that there is a logical connection
between fear and desire not a contingent connection so what is it
uh it has to this will take a lot longer than
than we can get into but it has to do with
um the uh how can i do it quickly it has to do with
the experience of satisfaction of a wish and the complex symbolic
meanings of that satisfaction there are fantasies
that accompany the satisfaction of a wish and those fantasies involve
ideas that are forbidden why as i said it's going to take a
long time to answer this question what what it touches on is the
i just it is it's it's the notion of repression
in a psychoanalytic sense the psychoanalytic notion of repression
that something occurs that makes desire
linked in some way to the forbidden and it's the linking to the forbidden
that constitutes the threat i guess i i guess constitutes the source of the
threat so it's not contingent joe's example was about a contingent
connection which can also exist but also i mean
anything that you desire is potentially threatening for its loss
so i mean threat comes with almost everything in life
you know and that's the the most fundamental thing of staying alive is
warding off the threats and the opportunity to acquire something useful
uh will usually cost you something there will be some threats involved
that you have to overcome to get it but also then you have to face the
uh the threats that come from maintaining hanging on to it
but it's love or anything else i i would agree that it's about the
the centrality of loss i'm wondering but what is there oh i'm sorry
just to just to comment on your example of the fianc
there it's not a given that you should be afraid because you're going to meet
your fianc's parents it is then you need to see him
i guess i'm wondering if you could consider even the psychoanalytic
desire for mastery just to simplify the discussion might you consider that
a component of that same stimulus the event that you fear
and the desire for mastery of that fear couldn't that be considered
a component and then you can avoid the difficulty of letting that influence
your topological map that way
um so i guess what your question is is could there be
a more sort of Euclidean or linear explanation
of how it is that threat and desire link up i i guess ultimately i'm thinking
it would be a mistake to conflate the events that trigger certain desires
and those desires or emotions generally in themselves so ultimately we're just
dealing with different systems and i guess i i kind of agreed with your
point uh what what is the top topological map telling us i
understand its utility and driving research questions
but does it really tell us anything about
the act does it have any predictive value yes
and that's my point that's the point if you didn't forget it
who cares thank you okay thank you question thank you
so we will end here
