 I'm Edner Sesien, welcome to this program on Genius. This is the second one we are doing, the first one. Essentially only discussed male geniuses, and Anne-Marie approached me afterwards and says, what about all the women? So then we decided we will have a second one. So Anne-Marie Levine, who is a member of our advisory board, who is a poet and a visual artist, has organized this meeting and she will run it. Our next meeting, we may have a meeting in April, but I'm not sure yet, but our next scheduled meeting is on May 7th and it will be on fear and anxiety. Thank you. That's a very unshirful note on which to start. Although truthful. So welcome to this round table. I'm Anne-Marie. I don't know if I was just introduced or not, but anyway, I'm going to introduce the participants, but I want to tell you a little bit as Ed did about the origins of this particular round table. I don't usually do this, but the program was inspired by a previous helix program called Understanding Genius. And as it happened, the sole woman on the panel didn't appear because her airplane was delayed. I'm not sure if this affected the discussion or not, but as I listened, I realized that Genius was being understood as a solely male property. Much it occurred to me as the nude in painting or photography is immediately understood to be female. Genius was defined by the four male participants as a combination of IQ and accomplishment. I thought the definition accomplishment was a very poor one for the history of gifted women since they were so often prevented from accomplishing anything at all or from developing their gifts or from having their accomplishments recognized simply by virtue of being female. But sometimes they did succeed. So where, for instance, in that discussion was Marie Curie, who won two Nobel prizes, her daughter who won a Nobel in chemistry, Rosalind Franklin, who at the very least did much of the work that led to the understanding of DNA, not to mention Hedy Lamar, noted movie star and physicist. I then realized that the Genius has mentioned we're not only all men, but all scientists. Where were all the women and where were the geniuses in the arts, male and female? My feminist streak was activated and I am an artist. I spoke first to Darren and then to the executive committee, which does our programming, and they agreed that we should do two more programs about Genius, one about women as Genius and one about Geniuses in the Arts. The last one will happen next season. So I put together a round table of, and I swear this is an accident, four women and one man. By intention though, they are historians, an anthropologist and an artist, all with a special interest in the historical evolution of the idea of Genius. Okay, now I'm going to introduce the panelists in alphabetical order, and I'll ask you to raise your hands as I mention your names so that people will recognize you. By the way, the complete biographies are on the website. I've shortened them. Joyce Chaplin is the James Duncan Phillips professor of Early American History at Harvard University and director of Harvard's program in American studies. She has taught at six different universities on two continents, a peninsula and an island, and in American studies program on the Atlantic Ocean. Her interests are equally varied. A specialist in Early American intellectual history, environmental history and the history of science, Professor Chaplin is the author of an anxious pursuit, agricultural innovation and modernity in the lower south, 1730 to 1815, subject matter, technology, the body and science on the Anglo-American frontier, 1500 to 1676, the first scientific American, Benjamin Franklin and the pursuit of Genius, round about the earth's circumnavigation from Magellan to orbit, and with Alison Bashford, the new worlds of Thomas Robert Malthus, rereading the principle of population. She's also the editor of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, a Norton critical edition, and with Darren McMan of Genealogies of Genius. Her reviews? Pardon me? Sure. Why are you doing this? If she's desperate to raise their hands, we don't have to get the audio on the line. But not on your paper. It's on the line. This is what we do here. No, not always. In such a way, it's on the line. You can stop with mine. Her reviews and essays. What? That's a compromise. You can stop with mine. That's true. Kathleen Keat, a professor of European history and secretary of the faculty at Trinity College, Connecticut. She received her PhD in history from Harvard with a year on pass on at the Institute de tout de Paris. Her undergraduate degree is from the Harvard Extension School, which she received while working at the Harvard College Observatory Astronomical Plates Stacks Library. Her research works to broaden the field of history by including within its purview, previously neglected, but rich subjects of study. Her first book, The Beast in the Boudoir, Pet Keeping in 19th Century Paris, helped create the thriving field of the cultural history of animals. This was followed by an edited volume of cultural history of animals in the age of empire. A second major project addressed the complicated history of attitudes towards ambition in French culture. Her book on this subject, Making Way for Genius, the aspiring self from the old regime to the new, was published in 2012. Currently, she is writing a history of Geneva and the Alps in the 18th Century, provisionally titled, Becoming Visible, a History of the Alps in the Age of the French Revolution. I will assume that I have been introduced. I'm not sure. I do three kinds of arts. And skip, pardon me? I guess I wasn't interested. I was a concert pianist and then a writer, poet and experimental fiction writer now and a visual artist in many ways, principally digital at the moment. I paint on the computer. I'm interested in the idea of genius, prodigies, et cetera. Darren McMahon is the Mary Brynze Mead. We locked Professor at Dartmouth College and was formerly professor at Florida State University. Born in Carmel, California and educated at the University of California, Berkeley and at Yale, where he received his PhD, McMahon is the author of enemies of the Enlightenment, the French counter-enlightenment and the making of modernity. Also of happiness, a history which has been translated into 12 languages and was awarded best books of the year honors for 2006 by the New York Times and many other publications. In 2013, McMahon completed a history of the idea of genius and the genius figure called divine fury, a history of genius. He's also the editor with Ryan Hanley of the Enlightenment critical concepts in historical studies with Samuel Moyne of rethinking modern European intellectual history and with Joyce Chaplin of genealogies of genius. McMahon has taught as a visiting scholar at Columbia and NYU, Yale, the University of Vermont, the Ecole no Maldes Superior, the Ecole des Otitudes and the University of Potsdam. His writings have appeared in such publications as the New York Times, Wall Street Journal, Boston Globe, the list is distinguished and as long as it is distinguished. Susan Seymour is Gene M. Pitzer, professor emerita of anthropology at Pitzer College, where she served as vice president for academic affairs and dean of faculty, as well as coordinator of women's studies for the Claremont colleges. Her research has focused on changing family and gender systems in India, specifically a longitudinal study in Boubanechwar, India. Her books on India include the transformation of a sacred town, Boubanechwar, India, women education and family structure in India and women, family and childcare in India, a world and transition. Her article, multiple caretaking of infants and young children, an area and critical need of a feminist psychological anthropology won the 2004 Sterling Prize awarded by society for psychological anthropology. In recent years, she has focused on two principal projects, rethinking the Western concept attachment. It takes the village to raise a child attachment theory and multiple childcare in Ellor, Indonesia and in North India. In the edited volume attachment reconsidered cultural perspectives on a Western theory and two on researching and writing a biography of her Harvard mentor, Kora Dubois, titled Kora Dubois, anthropologist diplomat agent. This is a woman who did succeed in a man's world in every way. Dubois' distinguished career included groundbreaking research in the culture and personality movement of the 1930s. Co-chairing a seminar with psychoanalyst Abram Cardner on the impact of culture on psychological development at the New York psychoanalytic Institute, but apparently not this one, 1935 to 37, directing research and analysis for the OSS in Southeast Asia during World War II and becoming Harvard's first ten-year female professor in the faculty of arts and sciences. So now I will sit down and become part of the panel and I'll ask Darren to begin by. Thanks, Emery. Yeah, I'm the token male on the panel. I'm happy to be here. I was actually fortunate enough to be at the last discussion about genius as well and I thought I'd just begin maybe by explaining why we didn't talk about women a lot in the last section and why the issue of women and genius is particularly vexed but also particularly important. And that is primarily because the very category of genius as a term that we use to measure others is a male category. It's invented by men, for men in the 18th century and indeed there's a long sort of prehistory prior to that that's also profoundly gendered. The very word genius derives from the Latin Genogeneré which gives us words like to beget a gene to father and it's conceived by the Romans as a kind of guardian spirit of all men and exclusively men, a god of birth. So there's a link to procreation, male procreation, there's an exclusive sort of gendering of the very term and this is built upon over the centuries by kind of layers of prejudice but when the cult of genius emerges in the 18th century this is even further reinforced. Somebody like Jean-Jacques Rousseau in the 18th century can say that women simply cannot be geniuses and you see then in the following century in the 19th century a whole kind of scientific apparatus designed to explain that. So everything from measurement of cranial capacity to sort of psychological and medical evaluations of women explaining why they don't have the capacity for genius. There's an irony here in that when the cult of genius emerges in the 18th century the way geniuses, male geniuses are described is often in terms of certain feminine characteristics. So we associate genius with imagination and imagination in the 18th century is a kind of dubious notion. It's the thing that women have when they read novels, one of the reasons why it's thought to be dangerous for women to read novels in the 18th century because their imagination will start and it will lead them into trouble. Geniuses of course are people who are particularly imaginative. Geniuses are particularly sensitive. They're talked about in this way in the 18th century as having the special capacity to feel, to feel for others to get inside the hearts and minds of others but this is also a way that women are spoken about. Genius are prone to kind of fits or convulsions, the divine fury that Plato talks about, women have hysteria. So there's a way in which even at the same time the concept is gendered in its origin, certain feminine characteristics as it were ascribed to women. Now there's a whole history of women, courageous women that Kathleen has written about who check this, this prejudice, the Stalinist stereotype. So you have Gertrude Stein very famously saying, I am a genius at the end of the 19th century and there are people in the 18th and 19th through that as well, combat the category. But I think that's just the place to start by noting what is in some ways an obvious point but profoundly important that the genius is a kind of profoundly gendered category to begin with and I think we can go from there. Anyway, let's talk about their work. I think it's gendered because it comes out of a long patriarchal tradition that we are still dealing with. As an anthropologist I think about different kinds of patriarchy a lot and try to think about the psychological effect on women in particular of different kinds of patriarchal institutions and it doesn't surprise me at all that women are not generally categorized as Jesus given that history. Sure, exactly. Not history cross culturally and history since basically since we became agriculture force. Right. I do a longer sense of history. Sure. And it must be said that it was never a category that was about human equality of any kind. I think that is the bigger problem and that the long, long history of gender inequality is really one aspect of the difficulty of using genius nowadays. I think genius is a great problem to contemplate in terms of deciding how much of our society really is democratic. That is founded on a fundamental idea about equality among all people. However, that might not be exhibited in everyday practice. It has to mean assumption about democracies. Genius doesn't exactly comfortably fit along those lines. And I think even when ideas about democracy are modified with ideas about meritocracy, well some people have different or greater merits than others. How is that going to be adjudicated? And this is where designation of who is or isn't a genius very often maps on to fundamental problems of democratic culture and fundamental asymmetries in terms of how we are willing to think about human merit. I'm also struck by how at least some women who want to present themselves as geniuses adopt gender terms of masculinity. Madame de Stal, Charmaine de Stal was accused of being masculine but she also presented a little bit as masculine in order to fit the type of a genius in a way. And by the same token she expresses her genius in a kind of way that encourages inspiration. But there seems to be a kind of model that women follow of being male in order to succeed in certain professions. That's her another idea. Although I don't think anyone thinks she's a genius but a celebrity. From an anthropological point of view, why are there female goddesses? They're goddesses but then there are no female geniuses. Well I don't think I'm not aware of Indian culture generally talking about genius but they would include women. And the interesting thing about India is that it's both a very patriarchal society in terms of the family system and the caste system and yet you have all these female goddesses and women are considered potentially very powerful. And heads of state. Pardon. And heads of state. And have been heads of state. Yes. And governors etc. They have certainly surpassed us in terms of political leadership. But Hinduism never became a monolithic patriarchal system and it gives a lot of openings for women. That is an interesting question though. Why you have Athena as the goddess of wisdom and yet not human embodiments. And of course that also brings to mind a dubious place of women in the discourse of genius and that is as muse. Genius as inspiring figure. Even goddess who gives to the genius his creative capacity. And that there's a long history of the geniuses as the women as muse for genius. And then in the 19th century you get in somebody like in Balzac or in Zola. And Zola's novel the figure of the mistress as at once kind of muse and then also impediment to male genius. Right. The distracts or siphons off male kind of virile intellectual energy and then poses a conflict. Right. And that's the conflict in contemporary India. And I would suspect it was an ancient Greece. Right. And there's the embedded problem that I think for a woman to be superhuman in some way makes her monstrous rather than necessarily divine. And so the phenomenon that would exist for a man being inspired by a kind of divine power reads differently. Yeah. When that is exhibited by women where there are long western traditions of categorizing powerful women as varagos. They're not quite natural for instance. Even female rulers. And likewise any number of holy women for instance who yes they're comparable to men but there's also something wrong with them. And so there isn't the same positive designation of that divine attribute in women. I mean they're always dangerous because they bite you serve male power. And they do begat children even though men control think they control the system. Yeah. Going back to the question of Zola's, there's actually two interesting women in that. There's the woman news who helps in the self destruction of Claude. But there's also the wife of the character who is meant to be Zola. And so La has a really interesting argument I think in that novel about the function of genius and creativity. Because the artist burns himself up and can never create the masterpiece. But the writer character who's supposed to be Zola goes to work every day and comes home to a family life that's directed by his wife. So I'm saying two things. One has to do with the balance between inspiration and work which even in Zola a recognized genius he understands that that's not really how you get that done. But also in the 19th century world there's very little room for a woman of genius. I'm not sure when there ever has been a lot of room. A woman of genius. 19th century difficulties notwithstanding. I mean I'm really stuck as well that there's a kind of a cumulative problem that it's one thing to be female and be a genius. I'm aware of the example of Phyllis Wheatley for instance, the 18th century African American poet. So black female genius probably not. And so the way in which female obviously belongs to a larger category of social experience and cultural expectation. I think that is a continuing problem 18th, 19th, 20th centuries and probably still now. Even for men I would think that to be a man in a genius seems less problematic perhaps and being a woman of genius but it depends obviously a social class, ethnic background, educational standing. So again I think the problem of women and genius is one facet of the bigger problem about well who is unequal and why do we say that. Yeah Senator if you go to small non-western society some of which are not patriarchal. You have women who get to be shamans for example and are considered really important, have special powers and are recognized and that's okay. But it takes a very different type of society and egalitarian society. Or reasonably egalitarian society. Also I think there's a question of whether that is a shamanism for example is exactly like genius or what the similarities it does not. I'm just saying if we go to something else where women are allowed to be in a special category where actually it's more like what Deryn described historically that there were supernatural powers women could have them and women in India can have them today. I think the point that Joyce was making about gender being embedded in a kind of larger problem of inequality is really important. I like to point out that the same man who declared that it's a self-evident truth that all are created equal Thomas Jefferson can turn around and speak quite openly as many people in 18th century American, Eastern Europe do of natural aristocrats. That is people who are born to be superior to lead and used in fact genius as one of the categories by which define these people and that I think gets to the heart of this problem that Joyce mentions in democracy. It's kind of actually a really striking thing that the cult of genius emerges in the very same century that human equality is on the table as a possibility politically and socially. That creates for somebody like Jefferson a huge problem. How do you run a society without hierarchy? We're going to get rid of blood hierarchy on the basis of gentry and aristocracy but we need to put something in its place and intelligence becomes one of these categories and then that category then is justified by a science, what in the 19th century would have been a science we would call in many cases pseudoscience today that placed women along with a whole slew of others, people of color, Jews on a spectrum that showed sort of white males of European descent on one end and then people of color, women and so forth on the other. The science that begins with physiognomy and craniometry leads to brain science culminates in IQ. In fact you can show that the founding fathers of the IQ exam, Bine and Lewis Turman come out of genius research studies in the 19th century and they share many of the prejudices. So, Galton, Turman, they have discomfort, well they just believe categorically that women can't be geniuses and Turman sort of from his data says actually women do pretty well in IQ exams but then says at the extremes right at the real extremes where geniuses are four or five standard deviations from the norm they don't have it right and they say similar things about Jews and so again the point being is that this category of genius is a problematic one in all kinds of ways not simply vis-a-vis gender. And precisely because it is in a sense defined during the age of revolutions in the 19th century because a sort of tremendous source of cultural anxiety well do you want to be equal or do you want to be unusual and the choices for people who are going to be in a sense classified as not toward the top why should there be one or the other and it is really a kind of removing opportunity rather than offering it. So, have it come back because we're in an age of anxiety again? Perhaps I do think that we're worried about whether we are still or increasingly a culture of meritocracy. I think that's a question that is of great concern for every generation but perhaps maybe for younger people these days about what kind of society are they going to enter as adults. It does seem like it's a moment where economic opportunities and therefore social and cultural opportunities might be closing so who is going to get through and on what merit and yeah I think that's one reason genius is a newly operative category for us. Well also if being special is somehow important being most special is to be most important and so that would be one way to kind of rule a thumb say what a genius is and so I mean it's a little bit just interesting about how we might nurture our progeny and make sure that everyone feels special but how special are you compared to other people. I mean I think that goes to the cultural issue about meritocracy and success and ambition and who gets to succeed and who doesn't and I think some of the anxiety comes from the fact that in a meritocracy if you don't succeed it's because you're not good enough and we still do hide a lot of the impediments to getting to a certain place. So that's one thing but I also wanted to go back to the point of origin that Darren was mentioning about the 18th century and the 19th century and I wonder whether one of the reasons why it gets so fixed the issue of gender and masculinity is that we welcome a world in which progress is very important and we say that one of the characteristics of a genius is to be able to see into the future and so perhaps the future that we want to see in the 18th and 19th century possibly today too has to do with technology has to do with the economy has to do with some of the fields in which women were not well committed at the time. So if a function of genius is to be able to leap into the future and see where we're going maybe that's one of the reasons that gets so associated with the privilege with masculinity the two things go together we were not interested in the 19th century or today in a world that works with imagination as unless it's to the degree that it works with technology and imagination Microsoft and Google. So are you kind of indirectly equating genius with function? I actually like to think of the relationship between genius and function. I don't think it's just says that I truly understand the importance of say a Mozart but I think if we think in terms of how the word genius functions in our society or calling certain people geniuses and not reading certain people as geniuses or not I think it might help unlock what what we mean by it what we mean by the word and how then it works. Rather than assume that it is a natural category of being or that it measures something trans historical I do think that the designation of the world and how word sorry and how it functions is really analytically important more so than determining well yes no maybe in the case of actual historical people. And that is actually a place where one can show that when the category emerges in the 17th century people who refer to most often as genius with poets and creative artists and then you get the introduction of statesman the kind of exception that proves the rule is Newton who's spoken about as a genius from very early on but often in a way that characterizes in more like an writer or poet than a scientist and it's really not until the 20th century with the Calderon Einstein that that immediate association between genius and science and technology is made and today this is I should fill you in on the back story when we were downstairs we were all commenting on the fact that genius has reemerged relatively recently as a kind of topos of discussion in popular culture but also in academic culture in a way that would have been unthinkable 20 or 30 years ago when genius was still so implicated in its dark past its its racism its misogyny its connection to eugenics and we've spent in the at least in academic circles the last you know several decades kind of deconstructing genius and yet it's it's back and we're sort of trying to figure out why that's the case but it is back and it's been spoken of and I think one of the ways in which it's spoken of is precisely as as Kathleen says with respect to Google with respect to Microsoft with respect to business technology and culture and you know maybe there is this hope that that scientists of genius can get us out of terrible problems like global warming so that we can still you know run around in our expensive cars all the time and so forth but so when you say genius is come back what is it that this come back exactly the conversation about this issue the conversation sure it does the conversation since it's not back in anthropology does the conversation never was there women I mean is that part of the conversation I think so I mean you know the I believe in Julia de Christiva I mean yeah like geniuses actually female genius functions as a female yeah I mean even some people are writing that or that way yeah and even even for historians I think that obviously we're talking about a certain idea that is floating around the global West and has very United States dimensions that yeah really you referred to Silicon Valley is a very specific site genius which is a very particular place on earth let's just say so I'm not I'm not sure where it's back certainly within Western academia picking up I think on some of the public's willingness to use it again as a innocent category of description whereas we obviously approach it with more suspicion about what it represents in the longer history and a disbelief that is actually describing something real yeah I mean yeah I think one can point to ways in which it's back in as you say not just in the United States but in Western media more generally but there is a surprising resurgence of interest in it as an analytical category it seems within in academic circles which is quite striking I think well say when could say that genius is good to think with now so we're trying to think about issues of meritocracy we're trying to think about issues of child raising we're trying to think about practical questions about how to see it solve global warming maybe there'll be a technological solution I'll grow into things like that but inter for historians it's become a category that helps us maybe see the difference between the 18th century and the 19th century or our connections with different periods so that's what we might mean by good to think with it helps open up a certain plane in history that we hadn't thought through before sure and therefore the work that it is supposed to be doing in any given era is quite striking that the older poetic artistic sense of genius only gave way to our modern scientific technocratic idea of it with Einstein so it's really quite striking that Darwin for various reasons is never really described as part of a cult of genius and that's a really interesting 19th century would seem lapse in terms of the development of genius but it makes perfect cultural sense and only now I think are we moving really even away from science in terms of discoveries about the natural world to a technological application of our knowledge to solve problems in a world where I think we are all worried about shrinking natural resources shrinking opportunities and therefore the human mind has to expand and genius does that for us whoops well slightly related question and a little bit maybe interesting with respect to concerns about gender I'm thinking about the recent triumph of a computer over the go master and I'm just thinking to argue that whether computers or the artificial intelligence are in fact masculine or whether they're neutral or feminine or feminine. Nootful would be the real achievement right that it's beyond gender somehow it's machine intelligence cannot be described in terms of men and women. Except for there's of course huge public discussion about the lack of female coders right and computer engineers is a real problem so and I mean that's actually a really interesting question to be asking I think. But again a very culturally distinct one since that the I R our idea that mathematics and computer science belong to men is again Western and India mathematics and coding are more open to girls than they are here so an interesting way in which internationally that machine genius may eventually if it is the work of many global hands to be neutral. I was struck in the description of the battle between the human and the machine with the go that the machine had seemed to have found an inspired way to win the game it had been a way that hadn't been thought of before so the go master said I had never thought of using those kinds of things as opposed to simply thinking more quickly to get to a certain point. So perhaps the machine had genius in this older fashion sense of of inspiration. I'm also reminded that the Hamilton speaks a lot about genius the obviously the show Hamilton exclamation point. Burr talks about you know everybody geniuses lower your voices he mentions that his mother is a genius and there's a sense that you know a kind of reification of the revolutionary moving history forward through acts of individual and collective genius and that might be something that has such resonance today because maybe it goes back to a question about anxiety who's going to solve our problems who's going to solve global warming who's going to figure out who the bad people are in Paris and Belgium and stop the bot means you know who's going to do this is it going to be collective is it going to be individual how are we going to get there. And here's where I think I'm going to be a part of it. But here's where I think the ideas about genius intersect with those about charisma and leadership as well as I mean we were talking earlier downstairs about the cult of celebrity and the idea about particularly people grabbing the spotlight as Hamilton did and does every night again and again and again where having ambition and wanting to be prominent can be qualifications or be perceived as qualifications for problem solving. And establishing when as a genius because another point we were beginning to develop downstairs to have to do with it has to somehow to do with success too. I mean if you were four years old and you know if that person is a genius. So achievement and getting to the place where one can achieve is one of the vital questions and I think that intersects with the usual gender because it has historically been so much easier for a male to get to that space than for a female to get to that space. One of the projects I'm working on has to do with a man in Geneva who explores the Alps for the first time. But he has a sister who is almost invisible in history. Sounds like a familiar story. But it's very interesting. Her sister's name is Judith Yudith. And Voltaire is living in Geneva at the same time she is growing up. And she asks Voltaire if he would be her mentor. And she writes him letters and they meet. And he plays along with her. And then at a certain point in time something horrible happens. And it appears that they have a little bit of possibly a sexual encounter. It's probably not true. But her reputation is ruined throughout Europe because of this. It's written about in Grimm's. Why wasn't it enhanced? Why did it ruin her reputation? It ruined her reputation in Geneva as a 1617 18 year old girl. It enhanced Voltaire. So that Grimm and Grichalu and in fact the court circle laughed at his net Voltaire. He's almost 80 years old and he's still having these things. It's actually Madame de Dene who spreads this room. So it's terrible for her. But what is interesting is that the young Madame de Chatelet also had As Voltaire be my mentor. And it works for her and she becomes very important as a mathematician, translator of Newton, et cetera, et cetera. And what I'm trying to say is that there's a more vulnerable way in which women have been able to get to the world of success. It is often through the world of the masculine. So it's also very open to, we might even say abuse, but vulnerabilities too. And that's just part of the problem, the gendered problem. And I began with talking about saying that genius is recognized through achievement. It's just a more difficult and more complicated way in history for women to get to that place of achievement. And it certainly been allowed to begin. And it's certainly important for 18th century ideas of genius that it seem untuttered, that it have a kind of natural and internal foundation within the person who's going to be so designated. And that to be dependent on the education or the tutelage or the patronage of another questions that. And so the way in which a particular young woman might work through a male patron would immediately question whatever accomplishment might eventually play out. Which I think continues to be a sense about genius. That it has to have a kind of spontaneous bursting out from a person which obviously puts a burden on somebody who has less access to education and all those things that might actually be the foundation for this kind of accomplishment. So is genius then completely related to the product of that person or is genius based on the level of the IQ? In other words if a person with an IQ of 110 makes a fantastic discovery he becomes a genius. Well you know that's so interesting because I do think that that's part of the point that not just so law makes but Stondal who very very gifted writers but Stondal also has a moment of truth. Though he's a genius but he's a moment of truth he says in his autobiography his memoir. He says why did I you know 30 years older however years older and I've been waiting for inspiration every day. Why didn't somebody when I was 15 tell me just to get up in the morning and work for three to five hours a day. So I'm not fully answering your question but clearly actually doing the thing is important. Maybe with a IQ of 110 or 140 I don't know. I mean there's this whole kind of romantic idea of the undiscovered genius right. But when genius becomes a category of research and it's Francis Galton who's the father of eugenics who's the key figure here. His first book is called Hereditary Genius and he tries to figure out why genius arises at a certain point. He just makes a distinction that creativity or production is the sole measure of genius otherwise you don't have anything and so he says basically an undiscovered genius is an oxymoron. And a lot of people who study genius now follow that so Dean Keith Simon who was here last time with us who as a psychologist emeritus at UC Davis practices what Galton called historiometrics and basically you study achievement. You study production right and a genius is in the goods. The problem with that kind of analysis though is that and this is Dean's own figure that something like only 3% of significant world production in the arts or in the sciences is created by women right. And you know in other words and so this was a problem for Galton. Galton turned around and said you know who are the geniuses in 19th century England and lo and behold they were all white men you know. Why would that be the case? Well because they've had access to education they've had the family backgrounds they run the institutions that give the label out in the first place and so studying simply productivity is a kind of way of finding what you're looking for in the first place. Oh sure it's been used in a terrible way. I mean in the world of mathematics in the world of philosophy I had a professor say to me once that this is true how many female philosophers can you name? Zero. Or mathematicians or composers. Don't bother. Don't bother. Don't bother. Don't bother. Don't bother. Don't bother. I was also struck by recent coverage of the I mean this is not a recent discovery but it is a good reminder that whenever a profession for instance becomes more than 50% female wages go down in that profession. So obviously any category that really matters has men as a minority and this is expressed in economic terms as well as the kind of cultural capital of the idea of genius. On the other hand a little bit this story of Mendelssohn's sister I mean I suppose Mendelssohn doesn't matter if it's called a genius or not but they came from the same family a very rich banking family in Vienna and they were educated together their education was apparently the wonder of all of Europe. Mendelssohn went to their celloone concerts and Mendelssohn and Fannie Felix and Fannie were educated together and they performed together at these celloins and everyone knew they were both geniuses. There was really no question and they were treated as such very well and when Fannie became 15 or 16 she received a letter from her father on her birthday and it said from now on you must consider yourself an ornament and your joy must come from your brother's success and it absolutely stopped her and she wasn't allowed to publish or to give concerts in public only in her home etc etc. So what happened was everyone forgot about her but she went on composing and playing but she could only do it in small forms. She couldn't hire an orchestra or a ride in or a torrier or anything like that to have when her performed in her house she did trios and duets and songs and stuff like that and she couldn't publish etc etc. And finally when her father died her very nice husband encouraged her to go and because other women were out for instance your son was out there doing things and Clara Schumann was too. It turns out that those were about class. If you were an aristocrat or lower class you could do things like that but if you were Jewish converted like the Mendelssohn's it was dangerous but anyway when she was about 40 and her father died she started to publish. Everyone knew who she was and how gifted she was and she was beginning to have some success and then she had a stroke and died and Mendelssohn collapsed when he heard about it and six months later he was dead too. So anyway I just wanted to say the obstacles that are put in women's paths still. Why are they no women philosophers? That's the dumbest thing I ever heard right? That's really strange. And I agree that these are terrible stories about the waste of human capital. Yeah again and again and again and they really show us the very embedded way in which societies have worked in terms of inequality but I still have the question why do we want women to be geniuses? What's achieved by having women fulfill that category or fit into that category that as we've been identifying is insidious in all kinds of ways. Agreed. So yes I think that this can be a very important way of revealing how Western society has achieved only so much by the 18th century or the 19th century or the 20th century but with the resurgence of interest in genius now I guess I don't want to see that the way in which women might be categorized as genius solves the problem because in sense I think it's playing along with the game that has been really really again insidious about ranking of different kinds of human beings for a very long period of time. Agreed. I just thought that since men have special status playing field out of the level that's well I just think that we should probably question the special status and no longer call Mendelssohn a genius. I agree. Absolutely. The category would be the best thing I think but you say it's coming back. No I'm just saying it's coming back as part of public discourse and fascination not that there's a reality now that never existed before. But it's that there's a real interest in trying to classify people in an era when we're trying just the opposite or trying to promote women and if you're going to promote women if you're going to have the category genius then you better damn well have some women in there. But what do you use as a term or a category instead? No I think of Virginia Woolf's to the lighthouse and I can't think of that book without thinking of it as being almost a perfect thing which is one of the definitions of what geniuses were a product of the genius. It's something that appears perfect structurally that can hardly be chipped away at. And so if we don't call that an active genius I wonder if we're calling it an active beauty which could also work in the world of mathematics mathematicians talk about their things as beauty. Newton's do own discoveries I think that's part of one of the reasons why he's understood in his age is poetic because the heavens are in some way poetic. There's a sense of perfection that might even be innate might be at least intuitive that we see but I can think of that novel as being something to my mind as perfect as it can be structurally and that somehow we can recognize. And so if it's not genius I wonder what it is. Well I think the difficulty here is shifting from praise of the product to praise of the producer. I agree I think that's it as I said that I think it's it rather than Virginia Woolf being the genius things are a work of genius and it would be liberating I think with respect to gender itself. Right because actually if we could identify a long list of all of the things that humanity has done that are valuable and amazing inspiration I think we could very easily establish that probably it's not just men who did that. Right or even behind the stories of great men are often great women. I think it is interesting though I said that 3% figure but the one way you can grow that a little bit is in literature. And literature doesn't have the same prohibition that sort of you don't need to hire orchestra. So the startup costs are less. So one can fairly easily compile a list of great women writers in the 19th century. Right from Jane Austen Ford. But the women who originated writing novels don't get acknowledged. I'm not saying they're geniuses but the history got rewritten and just eliminated a whole bunch of people. And it became a male category and then you rediscover women. But the other dimension here worth I think our interrogation is the idea of authorship anyway. That it is not necessarily only an individual thing. Sure. In the communities of production and creativity. And very often the credit goes to one person and it's interesting that that happens anyway. And it's of course especially interesting in terms of this discussion when it happens for the male author who is perceived as the genius within the community. But again if we're going to look at works that have benefited humanity who did that. I think very often it's not that we're talking about men and women but a lot of people working together. Yeah and that's another side issue but it's centrally related. The cult of genius emerges at the same time as the notion of copyright. And so there's an interest in identifying a creator who owns his creation so therefore can drive profit from it. So the cult of the genius then is very convenient. It's a convenient area also in a market society when you're trying to find ownership. I think that's part of its resurgence today. I mean that's quite real. Yeah. I mean just off the top of my head. I mean there have been a whole slate of genius films of late. So Alan Turing and the two Steve Jobs films. The Beautiful Mind Before That. The Facebook found. And forgetting the great Cambridge physicist who's in the wheelchair. He's mocking. Right. And then about four spasci and company. So I mean in the Jobs case it's actually very interesting. I mean clearly the man had marketing genius if you will. But Jobs isn't a creator of anything. And in fact one could argue that he's what he's really good at is taking other people's ideas and giving them a kind of logic of their own. And yet the brand, you know if you've seen that the first of the Jobs film the opening shot you know as he comes down the stairs is that big picture of Einstein. And this is a man that got Walter Isaacson who's written Biographies of Einstein and Benjamin Franklin to write his biography. So you know I mean he's setting out to kind of myth make in that way. Yes. Hence a lot of the popular interest. It'd be fascinating to know how far Isaacson's books have been translated and then probably that would help us identify who is talking about genius now because I think that's been a very important prompt for everyone. I think I like what the idea of eliminating the genius as the person but focusing on the work as a work of genius. Because it also takes care of the problem that you may be have a work that seems a work of genius today but ten years from now it seems completely wrong. So it allows you to be more flexible. It's hard to say he was a genius ten years ago but he's no longer a genius now. But you can say it seemed to us it was a work of genius then but now we've learned other things and we no longer think that about it. What may change in the future. Again that's what's happening with Lamarck right. Suddenly Lamarck is coming back. I mean Kathleen you mentioned Julie Christeva a little while ago and I think you know they're so coming out of this effort to deconstruct genius in the post World War II period then was an emphasis to think about what women might bring to bear specifically as women. And Christeva and then actually Derrida and one of his last works have things to say about this. Christeva wants to argue that women's link to creation and procreation gives them special insight into the creative process that women have a certain relationality that puts them in touch with different people in a better way. And again you get into kind of essentialist ideas of what genius is but I think that's important to bring up that there's that's part of a discourse that there may be something uniquely feminine about certain kinds of genius and that we should be in the business of cultivating that right. I see a push in a sense in a different direction on that question from animal studies which every year those folks are getting better at trying to make a good case for animal intelligence is comparable to human intelligence. And I don't think it's there yet I mean I am the yet is implied will see that we can't see into the future on that question. But it is interesting a lot of that analysis does not pay any attention to gender it's just how smart crows are right period what what kind of intelligence dolphins have and so it's that's a really interesting way again like computer or machine intelligence where it is for the moment neutral and I think pursuing a lot of the same questions but doing so quite profitably differently. There's some dumb male animals though. There's some white dumb male animals. So we blame it on him. The computer intelligence is neutral because the programming has been done by men for the most part and it has a very strong male cultural association. I was only referring to that. Now as we're getting more and more women into math and science and engineering that image may change but you know probably not in my lifetime but it's happening. I think the response in with respect to animal studies could be that here again you could see I mean you can see this argument being made that about the animals is very interesting because it raises the question of the distinctiveness of humans with respect to other species. One could say that genius could be held on to because it might be a special characteristic of being human because we can't quite measure it in animals. I'm not forwarding that but I'm suggesting that that might be something else that could be going on with respect to thinking about genius. What makes humans distinct in a world in which we're understanding ourselves in such a real web that has to do with machines and that has to do with other species? What is it particularly about being human that tells us that we're human and not something else? So once we find the genius dolphin that will be the question. The question. Yes and that is going back to what problems do we think genius is going to solve? If for instance it's climate change that's a way of thinking about ourselves in which we are comparing ourselves to other animals that we are just other animals we need natural resources and if we don't have them we are going to suffer but it is hypothetical whether we're going to be unlike other animals in terms of solving that problem. I'm laughing to myself because I'm remembering a French anthropologist who was there was a whole movement brain studies and not just studying brains but collecting them. There were massive museums all over the world and in the 19th century and one of the biggest was at the Museums de laum in Paris. 8,000 brains and skulls and of course the dominant notion of the time was that the bigger the brain the smarter you were and somebody pointed out that by that calculus the whale is the smartest creature of them all clearly. It's going to be a good hypothesis. How dumb scientists can be right? I mean they hadn't thought in those terms for the longest time that of course brain size varies with body mass. Bigger people have bigger brains. It doesn't mean they're smarter. Yeah but it's still an issue that people are fighting. I'm not entirely comfortable with genius as product. I'm not comfortable with genius but I think especially having written the biography of Cora de Bois and thinking about her and the life spans of other prominent women who managed to accomplish things in a world that was very male dominated and where it was very difficult for them. You have to look at the whole life to understand how special they were and I'm not saying I want to throw her into the genius category necessarily but it wouldn't be just one product. It would be the way she and others that I can think of managed to work through a whole series of very male professions and get to the top. So her life is the product. It's not any one thing. And I think of Gertrude Bell, somebody like that, the same thing. Many different professional activities but just an amazing woman. So for me it's the life and how they manage in under very difficult circumstances and what the toll was on them to get to that level of achievement. And I've often a very heavy toll. I think you're right but I'm also thinking about Margaret Mead and Ruth Benedict who I think didn't have to deal with as much prejudice for some reason in anthropology in those days. Not true. Not true. Okay, tell. Well, women, a small number of women were allowed to pursue PhDs but they never got positions. Mead was with the museum. Benedict did get a position because she worked closely with Boaz and he eventually got her a position at Columbia but as soon as he retired they brought in a man to run the department. And so she was the exception. Du Boaz was the exception for her generation. The only one. So even though there were a lot of women invited into the field, they were kept at lowly positions. Right. I see the attraction of thinking about a person as a genius in the sense of thinking about the whole life but I'm not sure whether, how would that not be a matter of determination plus talent, plus resilience plus all these things though. I wonder if it also does though speak to something in the history of genius. I mean, when things of Napoleon is often described as not just a genius at the military or a genius at people but he's a kind of charismatic genius person in this age of being that. I mean, it just seems like that's a little bit more of a myth than looking at a creation. I mean, I feel that we're on clear ground if we look at what has been accomplished. But I think though the what has been accomplished could be something more than one particular work of art or two. I'm kind of thinking of, I was thinking of this with respect to the issue of climate change and the meetings in Paris in December. And if you followed them at all, you could see that one of the reasons why the COP21 meetings succeeded was because of French diplomacy, which one could only say was an invention, a cultural invention of genius. It allows people to get together. The contrast was made between the talks in Copenhagen and the talks in Paris where in Copenhagen people couldn't eat good food and the lighting was bad and stuff like that. But the flexibility of the people in charge at Paris, Laurent Fabius and the woman whose name I forget and I totally apologize in charge, they mobilized the history of French diplomacy in order to get everyone as it were around the table. So what can I think of long term accomplishments as being accomplishments of genius that other people can use or not and that exist in a kind of sense that's both beautiful and effective? Shall we go to questions? Sure, let's do that. Just a quick comment as an avid Go player, a state of old night watching the matches, the commentators, I was often referred to AlphaGo, the program as she. I don't know if that was just a particular one person. But that's what we did. Thanks. Just a quick. Hi, thanks very much. I'm not a professional in the place that you are, but I'm used to thinking of intelligence, those seven categories of emotional intelligence and I'm wondering what if anything you think about viewing genius in that way. I mean there's almost no mathematical genius versus an artistic genius versus many other different categories of musical genius, is it useful to get at the issue of gender by segmenting achievement through the prism of major fields? So you're referring to Howard Gardner's idea that there are multiple intelligence and so forth. Yeah, I mean of course there's a much disputed notion whether to me it makes a lot of sense. I think the people on the other side of that argument would argue that there is something that unites spatial intelligence and mathematical intelligence and musical intelligence and that is the general intelligence factor G, right? That you can do factor analysis on IQ exams and show correlations between these various types. I mean personally I think that we all know people who are really good at math and can't talk to other human beings or people who can read out right and it makes intuitive sense to me that there are different styles, intellectual styles and I think this is something that Christabe was hinting at, that there may be something feminine about certain types of thinking. Again, I'm slightly uncomfortable with this but that was the way she was directed. I think it was useful in rescuing music as a form of intelligence and athletic ability as a form of intelligence. I mean I would have never, they didn't have that standing before Howard Gardner. Well, Gault actually writes about Rose and wrestlers in his literary genius, yeah. And then there's the Robert Musil's famous line of a racehorse of genius and the man without equality and so, but nonetheless I think you're right. And clearly, right? Well, in fact I was thinking just recently that Time magazine did a kind of special issue on genius and Sabrina, thank you, yeah. The African-American tennis star was on the cover as genius and clearly that kind of spatial sense ability to kind of see the court, you know, this is something that is a kind of genius, right? And I think that kind of superlative ability in a certain kind of culture. But I think it worked. Was that celebrity? I mean, sorry? Or was that a question of celebrity that she got on the cover of? Well, she's won a lot of tournaments, you know. I'm not saying it's not really good. I mean, that's the difference between genius and saying in this re-emergence of talking about people as geniuses, I'm delighted that she was, you know, they said that but I would guess that a big part of it was celebrity. Yeah, I don't know. I see in a sense a kind of democratization of the categories. Or maybe multiplying the areas in which people can make extraordinary accomplishments. Which, you know, that might be a positive, African-American woman is major. Which might be a positive development. But the categorization of certain kinds of genius as more female and others as male, I think that's a way of making sure that women don't get in some categories. Okay. Thank you very much. I hear today a lot of interesting ideas. But I have too many, too much to say. I try to be very short. But it's like comment and questions together. First of all, I would like to ask why nobody talked about how destructive people who we call geniuses could be. For example, especially in art, Medelliani, who was a alcoholic, destroyed his girlfriend, everything around him. In Stein, who destroyed his first wife, wife with whom he probably started his probability theory. And a lot of other people who destroyed everything around them would, I would like to be that kind of genius would I would like to drink for whole night to discover yellow color as Medelliani. I probably would not. You see? So it's very, it's one of the questions. Would it be possible that actually this hierarchical structures, when we put geniuses on the top, would be actually the cause of today global warming today. Catastric, you know, like we should not probably wait for geniuses to solve the trouble. We should recycle and probably we should rebalance the situation and remove this hierarchical structures. And then we probably to survive. And if we wait for this, probably we would not for solution. And probably it's not good idea in a neutral artificial intelligence, probably it should be absolutely, I don't know, not different sex. It's not even connected to sex. You see, it's kind of they don't have sex. Computer don't have sex. They are absolutely different. It's something that absolutely separate from us. I just should put them in this category. And geniuses actually probably part of the problem. And we have to rebalance this situation. I had something else to say, but probably I don't remember maybe. I completely agree with that. Geniuses in some ways, the category is what gives people permission to misbehave. I wouldn't say that there is something innately about geniuses that is evil. But certainly I doubt that Napoleon questioned people who called him a genius and that was if anything kind of encouragement for what he thought he was doing. So absolutely the way in which it gives license to people to misbehave and more privileged people even more licensed to misbehave, definitely. And that's part of the mythology, so it's going way back. And it's a diderot of rights in the Ramos nephew about the kind of relationship between genius and crime. And there's a famous line there where the genius is like a tall tree that chokes off the sunlight and shade for the other trees around so you get stunted growth, right? It might be the 19th century that allows people first to be geniuses of crime. Yeah. Look in the stories about the tribes. Mori artes. Napoleon of crime. And Napoleon of crime. Sure. Speaking of geniuses who are misbehaving, there's a gentleman named Kanye West who's declared himself as a genius. But one of the ideas that's circling him is that he's not actually a genius, he's a genius. He's involved in a middle of a scene. There's a lot of people that he's connecting with. They've kind of allowed him to come up and he's become the spokesperson of a larger group of people and you can see the same thing with Steve Jobs and other characters. So I guess the idea is genius just a dumb old word that we don't really need to focus on anymore and more focus on the sinuses because then you can take each individual who's speaking today as their own seniors or as a member of a scene that's bringing something, bringing enlightenment forward to humankind. I hadn't heard that term as wonderful. That's the idea of being the conductor, the band leader or the empressario or the master of a studio. So again, going back to the idea that communities actually make the greatest creative contributions to society. But the way in which that often has to intersect with or develop into an author, that one person is more important in terms of creating that creative ferment, making the product that is eventually a good viable. And branding it, getting the copyright and so on. So you're so connected with the culture today and how things are working in Google, et cetera, et cetera. It just seems like an echo of that and in a way to legitimize it. But one could argue, I mean you mentioned Darwin before. I think one of the reasons why Darwin wasn't categorized as a genius in the way that Einstein leaders is that people could see clearly what was also true of Einstein. And that is that Darwin was sort of first to the block but only just, right? He hadn't Wallace and others there. And if Darwin hadn't come up with a natural selection, it would have been discovered. So Darwin kind of puts his finger on something that's in the air. And that's what geniuses always do, right? And the seniors in this respect does that as well. It sort of becomes a focal point for cultural movement, right? And then brands it individually because that's the way we like to do things in the West. But really it's speaking for a collective or embodying collective movement. The comment before about Hindu goddesses, it inspired me to wonder about the connection between religious movements and secular, the rise of secularism and the emergence of the cult of genius and the re-emergence of genius today. And so far as I wonder if genius is not potentially sort of a replacement for God that, you know- It's almost a genius. That's the thesis of my book, Butter, I'd say. Your first $20 bill is available. It's going to pay you after. Genius. I hope you cited me in your book. I will now. And also just in terms of, you know, in a climate of a rise of secularism, society still looks to defer to some sort of authority that if someone is the pinnacle of something, that therefore they are, you know, even if they might be hesitant to accept it, that they acknowledge it, that they are sort of divinely inspired with that. And also the extension of that is that in Western society that, you know, might be, you know, it sort of implied in everything but this, you know, paternalistic, monotheistic idea of God as referred to as a man, that that might be another sort of, you know, undercurrent of why it's so difficult to accept women as genius. But I'm interested to know about what you know of the connection of religion and secularism in the Institute. Yeah. I mean, I wasn't kidding. It's actually the main piece of my book that the cult of genius emerges in effect as a replacement for not only God but for a whole kind of series of mediating beings that in all of human history from the beginning of time had served as kind of intermediary areas between the heavens and the earth, right? So saints, prophets, apostles. And this is very clear with somebody like Newton. I mean, in the iconography of Newton, Newton is somebody who can see the mind of God, right? And we talk about Einstein in this way too. See into the fabric of the universe, right? See in a prophetic way, in a way that ordinary mortals can't. And then translate that and give voice to that. Whereas Newton buried, you know, in Westminster Abbey, right? So like a saint, literally cultivated like a saint. In fact, there's a whole kind of traffic in the body parts of geniuses in the 19th century as if they're relics of saints and so forth. And so there are, I think, a lot of ways in which the genius serves or does religious work. And in fact, at the beginning of the 20th century, you have German and Austrian sociologists writing about a religion of genius, and somebody was talking about the dark side of genius. Actually, this is a whole nother kind of discussion, but it's very clear that the national socialist and Nazis make use of this kind of genius cult in promoting Hitler as a genius, as, you know, bizarre as that sounds to us today. So there are all kinds of things. And Hitler self-consciously uses this as well. But it seems to be the dark side of this dimension of genius is the fact that it's so pessimistic about human nature. Because it basically says that humans cannot, are not capable of extraordinary achievement unless there's this sort of weirdly inhuman capacity that they have. Right, that's true. That might be widely distributed. And this seems to me kind of defeatist, that we assume that human beings cannot actually be creative and extraordinarily devoted to certain kinds of tasks and problem solving. And that has to belong to a tiny minority of people who are bizarre. Right, monstrous. Why do we have to think of humanity as being defined that way? Why can't we think of achievement again in more collective terms? And as being more evenly distributed through humanity, that would be, I think, a more optimistic idea of the race. And I just wonder also, though, it seems that we're sort of setting up the 19th century and modern, you know, the 21st century, essentially, as two points in, you know, significant times in genius. And you referred to sort of, you know, the period which I assume is essentially the 20th century, although you just cited the rise of Hitler. So, but I wonder if, you know, when you talk about the, the retraction in the 20th century, if you're referring mostly to the academic sphere, if you're referring to society at large, and if so, you know, if you might speak to the religious sort of frame of what's going on in the 20th century, by contrast to the 19th century. Yeah, I mean, huge subject. But I think the short answer would be the genius cult is extremely strong in Europe and in this country until the Second World War. And after the Second World War, for a whole variety of reasons, part of it's being linked to the Nazi cult and also the kind of the cult around Stalin and Lenin as geniuses and other totalitarian regimes used, linked to eugenics and so forth. What I call the religion of genius loses its appeal. In some ways Einstein is the last kind of figure who occupies this space. And even to, I mean, Steve Jobs plays the part well enough. I mean, he's eccentric and, you know, he's prone to outbursts and so forth. But no one really thinks that he can kind of speak the voice of God, right? I don't know, maybe I'm wrong about that. Which God? Yeah, exactly. That he's sort of divinely enchanted and possessed. And so I think that, you know, in that respect you see kind of falling off of the religion of genius in the second part of the 20th century. And I don't think that's back today. I mean, what's going on today is different I think. But you do, I'm sorry, you do almost see a homogenous mass of people with as few special people on top which is a part of the issue. And you know, it might be worthwhile to recuperate a kind of English sense of difference, that sense of eccentricity. And a more of a celebration of eccentricity is something that's valuable in a society. John Stuart Mill makes a lot of this as a notion of the importance of tolerating people who have behaviors that are not comfortable with ours. It could be- Not just tolerating people. It's genius as he's worried about and on liberty. I mean, that's why you have- What do you mean worried about? He sees modern democracy, you know, undermining the foundations for the creation of genius. Those special people that make all of human history. True, but he also argues in terms of the exact word eccentricity which I think is slightly different than genius. And he says that it's important to allow for eccentricity because we don't know what that person's odd solution might be, we might need that in the future. I see that in- I'm seeing that in a greater cultural context of English eccentricity which allows for difference but without sort of we all are this way. It allows for meritocracy but also allows for democracy because the presumption isn't that there's a few select and a- And, you know, massive knocked. I mean, we'll go back to the genius thing but eccentricity I think is an important concept that might go back to that. Which is closely linked to genius as well in tradition. Yeah, yeah, but it isn't. Go ahead. Okay. So, I love the idea of allowing yourself to misbehave. And I think that's a key to genius because good girls have to- Good girls do which is not make- not make a mess. I mean, you can't collect stuff. You have to have- your brother has to have the bigger room and girls have to defer to guys. So, I think there's a gender called for bias against women being genius. You have an expectation. You mentioned- it's so funny when you were talking about Mendelssohn's- I couldn't remember her name. Yeah, of course. And I thought, I can't write Mendelssohn's sister. What's wrong with it? You have to say who she is. And I believe that genius and identity, self-identity, self-awareness, are basically culturally transmitted more, more, more, much more than genetically. And I love that idea going back to permission, permission. You have to give yourself permission to take yourself seriously. Also, skipping forward to the idea of the misfit and the holy fool, which is somebody who can say the truth to the king, like King Lear's holy fool stuff. I would love to see plays, classics where women are given the role of King Lear. So, let's see what she does with King Lear. You know, Meryl Streep? Instead of acting like the fool that she's going to be coming out with a new movie on this woman who couldn't sing, of course, Meryl Streep has a beautiful voice. But I want to see Meryl Streep and as King Lear. You know, let's put on different costumes and give ourselves permission to be just outrageously fantastic. Thank you. One more, yes. Okay. So, I think this actually, from my point of view, the biggest problem is that we have to feed in male-dominated structures that was developed and created by male-dominated civilization. And even first group that established itself oppose male-dominated structures like feminists, they're extremely hierarchical. For example, when I came to United States, I discovered that I'm not enough feminist, although I'm a woman. You see? So, it's kind of these, the whole structure of society and lead to development of the leaders and like something that we have, like houses that we have to direct ourselves. And would you think that without, without, we could solve our problems without changing all these structures because they're extremely powerful. You cannot, you cannot remove them. You see, you have to feed them. Right. Well, that's where, what, what greater good could we do? Would it be by making women geniuses equal to men? Would it be by getting rid of the category of genius altogether? I mean, which would accomplish the greatest good for society? I kind of think the latter, but that may be a minority opinion. I just think that doing away with that extremely hierarchical designation of some people at the expense of others, that's probably the bigger accomplishment than trying to get women equally into the ranks of the tiny minority at the top. I just question, what would be accomplished by doing that? In part because I think too, the way that geniuses function historically, you mentioned this earlier, Joyce, is that the dominant discourse that wins out in the 18th century is that geniuses is born not made. That you don't acquire genius, you can't learn genius, that learning genius is somehow inferior, right? That's talent, but not genius. And therefore, genius doesn't need institutions. Genius doesn't need good schools and early exposure to reading and so on and so forth, all the things that are necessary to cultivate human capital in a democratic way, because genius always transcends that, right? And so the discourse then takes our attention away from institutions. So we see that now. A kind of intellectual 1% will do everything for us in that. But we see that now in the disaster of the SAT tests, which were designed to find the geniuses or the talented people outside of a small, well-educated family elite. But in fact, of course, as we all know, to do well, one almost has to take a lesson, take a test, take a bat, unless you were two of my siblings who get eight hundreds without being tutored. There are some people, but it doesn't work. It doesn't work to have that test defined, you three geniuses or you three talented people, no matter what your upbringing is. We just know it doesn't. But McCartney, genius of work, is it responsible? It's interesting. You know, I think it's a historical discourse. Does it do good for gen divisions or for us collectively? Yeah, exactly. Yes, right. So we don't get enough questions. We think they're stupid and ridiculous. You have a question? I think occasionally you've come close to this other category of genius, but no one seems to have mentioned it. Geniuses is an ontologically suspect notion. It's something that only exists in society. And that's where the definition really needs to be. We need to follow with through society. In other words, you're consciously that way. It seems to me that it's this need for a savior, which is really one of the foundations of that. And I think it potentially explains a lot about the notion. Certainly not everything. And I would like to share more about that. Religion is your department. Yeah, I know. But since it's understood. I don't think... Well, the savior aspect, I think, goes back to that divine sense that, again, someone who is superhuman does work that the rest of us cannot do. I want to be a little bit more specific. In other words, it has to do, in other words, a genius arises when we need someone to resolve a crisis. And it may be a real crisis, or it may be just a perceived crisis. It seems to me one of the most recent genius that I can think of is Andy Warhol, who saw... What crisis did he solve? Who solved a right, an artistic crisis. One of the second crises as well. True. He was a genius in that way. Yeah, I mean, there's no question that, I mean, from the early 19th century, geniuses are spoken of as redemptive figures who suffer and sacrifice for the whole. And this is part of the mythology of genius in the romantic period, and then going forward, that geniuses are often despised by society because they're so far ahead of the times that they can't be understood and appreciated. So they suffer in silence, and yet they're working for the redemption or the betterment of humanity. And so you get the call to figure like Tasso, the Renaissance poet, right, who's institutionalized as a mad man because society can't understand his genius. This is, you know, the Alan Turing film kind of plays on that idea too, of the genius who was literally persecuted, right, for his eccentricity, for his strangeness, his queerness in this case, right, being different, being literally being gay. But also because the society of the time cannot understand him. Also geniuses suffer become martyrs, la Martine, the French poet says that all genius is modern, as a martyr to Janier Martier. And there is no question that that's part of the discourse becomes very self-energious. But I think what's being said is that, if I understand you correctly, that in a sense, someone has to solve a problem before they're acknowledged kind of as the genius. I mean, we can even think of the 19th century there, Victor Hugo is a genius, but he has solved artistic problems. He's solved political problems. He's solved the problems of rallying a certain group of French people around a certain idea about democracy and Napoleon, about the nation itself. And he embodies a people, right? Yeah. And whom he's regenerating. So that's another, the person who has solved the problem, whatever it is, has that, is given the license of being the genius, as opposed to seven-year-old Victor Hugo. Sure. But there's also a historical mismatch that there are plenty of crises that never get solved. The genius or the savior never appears. Also I think, again, this scenario is very gendered. The suffering savior is the genius figure, tends to be male. Women are just supposed to suffer, so it doesn't necessarily play out in the same way. Yeah. No, there's no question. Okay. Thank you very much. Thank you. You want to end on that note?iren.