 Can you give me, is it on? OK. So I thought, what we'll do for the wrap up, anybody who is sitting on this, in this round area, you would all participants in the meeting in the round table. So if you have any ideas, thoughts, that you feel you didn't get a chance to express properly or any conclusions you draw or any questions you have, this is the time to discuss that. And then after a brief period of time, we'll see if there are any questions from the remaining audience, and then that's it. So Siri. Yeah, I have a question for the psychosis, then Swangah people, and actually anyone else who wants to contribute. And there are two points. One is relating the bipolarity of Valbox thinking to or the continuum from one pole to another to the psychotic disorder and manic depression. And the other thing that's very interesting, and I know someone who may answer this, is the question of cosmology and psychosis. When I was teaching writing as a volunteer at the Payne-Whitney Psychiatric Clinic for almost four years, a lot of psychotic patients in my classes, and they were highly cosmological thinkers. And I mean, they would bring together all kinds of different cosmologies into one, and write about it was very interesting. So I wanted to know from scientists and psychoanalysts like what the connection between cosmology, psychosis, and Valbox. That's it. That's it. That's it. I think more than that. Paul, once more, that's your number. You are the psychiatrist. Yes, for the first question, I think I discussed this morning together. It is the relation to the meaning, to the excess of the meaning. And we can discuss the psychosis like I said, la con, an anacroncion a ciluver, an open sky unconscious. With the direct access to the things in other schools, we can speak about symbolic equation. It is the fact that for us, for neurotic, it's very difficult to interpret the world. But for a psychotic, he has a direct access to the meaning. But it is for psychotic. This is for psychotic in general. For bipolar is also the question of humor, the depression. For me, for Warburg, it's difficult to do really the difference. Because the time of Warburg to say it is a mannequin depressive psychosis, it was a psychotic structure. And if we see the different description of Warburg states during the clinic at Binswanger, he was really in a psychotic access with delirium, with psychotic anxiety, with new world, with persecution, with projection, with dissociation. The question remains the same that we discussed this morning. Why invites this kind of state? He has an access to something which is inaccessible in another state. For cosmology, I think it is important. For example, it was Bispour, who from Brazil, from Rio, who created a cosmological coat with all the world inside the coat and the both. I think Les and Kiteslingen, that Les and the Bell of the clinic. But more actually in the theories before where he's actually articulating a bipolar theory of emotion, essentially, and how it appears. Yes. I once said something about the bipolar. I have a brilliant small article called the Eternatus Cso, where there's always movement. He never occupies either one pole or the other. I agree. And in fact, he has a little figure striding and standing up on the ceso in the middle. That's a very difficult position to keep for several decades, right? It's much safer to either sit on one side or the other. And you have to keep your balance dynamically for so long. And that has to do also with his later critics that want to position him either on the one side or the other side of the Enlightenment or the irrational Kant or the religion. It's never either or. It's a position in between. And next to polarity, there's the other term, Ousklish, at Maden Varyngheuser, which in English is called not exactly a balance. Balance. But it's not a static balance. The balance is always dynamic. You're always sort of oscillating between the two. And compensation is a kind of economic term. You can't say why. Right. Yeah. So it's always dynamic. And there's never exact safe positioning in the property. In fact, he energizes the polarity by making it unstable. Well, I think the question is how perhaps you will give the perspective, because for me it is not the good way to do a discussion about psychosis of verbog. It's more important to understand how this kind of mental status opened to something new. Like it was creating. In fact, we are now in New York 100 years after discussing about verbog. Each one perhaps, we have each one, his own verbog. It's my impression after this discussion. We have different verbog views. And we are taking lessons from verbog in a different point of view. But for me, the question of people-already is interesting for the notion of patos, for perhaps what can we learn from patos. I know nothing of psychosis, of course. I just wanted to recall the fact that when verbog describes himself in terms of sort of autobiographical image as a psychostorian, trying to explore and understand the visual history of the West has taken between two extremes, mania and melancholy, the ecstatic nymph and melancholic god, of river god. There, of course, you have a polarity of figures. And this polarism, as he says, he thought at a certain time it was his own invention. His own creative invention as a historiographical category. But there is a very interesting entry in his journal as early as 1907, where he says, I'm reading good as metamorphosis of plants. And I find there the notion of polarity, polarity, polarity, what I thought was my own idea. But all is there, all is there in good. And I think I have tried also personally to explore this background, which is morphological. And morphological means that you never understand one phenomenon if you do not see both forces in it. So that patos formul exactly is the fact that you have a formul, which is not a form, which is both a form and the repetition or the possibility of repetition of this form, the formula, which immediately expresses a patos, but can be electrotechnically inverted. Polarized in this sense, even from these electro-technical metaphorics we were talking about it before. So it can become, as we said many times during these round tables, the mannered and the Magdalene. The healing serpent and the poison serpent and so on. But good is there. Just to follow up, I would like to invite you to, since you wrote extensively on this topic, you were mentioning a verbal reading of the good searching for the wolf lands. So could you tell us more about this sort of trail recurrent in the history of images of econology, trying to link symbolic forms with their biological origin and perhaps bringing in pit rivers and the like? I'll try quickly, which is not easy. Of course, the question of the war, of the origin, of the war built that has already come out during discussions is rooted in Gerta's morphological thought. And Gerta, as we know, understood this idea of natural research, not as a dilatentistic approach to the study of nature, but on the contrary, as the other side of the moon, meaning that a novel, a love novel as the elective affinities can be understood as well as a chemical treatise, a theory of attractions and repulsions of nature and the importance of nature, of sympathies and antipathy of magnetism as well. So it must be read as a holistic author in this sense. Or we find already in Gerta, I think, a tension which is to be found afterwards in Barbara as well between historical understanding of the war and properly morphological. When Gerta was looking for the warplancy, for a certain time, it was convinced that the warplancy was the first plant ever that had appeared at the beginning of the world. And it was convinced that he had found it in the jinkopilob, the jinkopilob was the most ancient plant on earth. From the jinkopilob, every other plant had derived, according to this first historical approach to this notion of the war. But then going to Italy, there was a letter to help there from Palermo's botanical gardens. And there he understands, and of course his reading of Kant is very important as well because he speaks of a transcendental blood, transcendental leaf, meaning that war is not something that you have to look for on the timeline, the first point on the line of the chronological line. And from that point, everything else in the vegetable phenomena descends and arrives. War is rather the theme never given, sort of a bit against the imperceptible, say, because it was a morphologist as well, Gertian, morphologist as well, who took perhaps a family resemblance. So you recognize the theme among all the vegetable phenomena. During processes of condensation, of expansion, how do you say it? Alungamento. Lengthening or compressing, any vegetable phenomenon is the leaf. So it can become the roots, it can become the branches, it can become the trunk. And the same can be said for the osteological system. So when he speaks of the war we are built, the original vertebrae, and he sees that it can become the bones of the leg, of the skull in metamorphosis, you recognize the vertebrae, but you never actually see it in itself. Only varides, so if you want to use a musical metaphor, we could say we don't have the theme, but we just have variations. Variations of a theme that is never given in itself, but only in its variations. And if you look at the panels of the nemosunearlas, where is the nympha? You have variations of a theme, of a patos forma that is there in every nympha that you look at, but never exhausted in any single nympha. So you can look at the golf player at the servant of the gillandaya, of the archive manad. And this I think is a morphological approach, theme never given, but in its variations. This is this tension between a historical approach to the oor, and a morphological is to be found in Barugal as well. For example, when he studies Manet, and he says Manet is not a new author. The de jenès sur l'erbe is not la nouveau té absolut. It's something that has roots in your journey, in Marcantonio Ramonde, in a drawing by Rafael, unfortunately lost, in a relief in the wall of Villa Medicin Rome. And so he needs to reconstruct the historical chain, going back to the model. So he has a traditional idea of the oor as the origin. But as we know, many links in this chain are missing. And moreover, if you go back to an elanistic model, you cannot say you have found the origin, because you can ask for a Greek origin, and for an archive Greek origin, an oriental origin, and so on. So the quest for the origin transforms itself rather in amorphology. So it's not important to put all these figures in a timeline, chronologically oriented, but rather to think them, I would say, in a radial scheme. At the center of the scheme, you have the Patosfarna, and around the scheme you have the figures that gather around the mother, as Gautis said, of the phenomena, of the oor phenomena. Like a mother that gathers around herself the children, and you have this network of phenomena. And I think that each panel of the mnemosuna are less organized like that, like sort of gathering of children around a mother theme that is never given. Warburg is one author of a very complex landscape, morphological landscape in late 19, early 20th century, that has never been reconstructed yet in its density, in its complexity, and I would call it this morphological paradigm in the humanities. In anthropology in our history, we found it in Yollis linguistics. The I'm Faje Farm is a morphological approach. Prop, morphology of the folk tale. Some structuralism, the stealth psychology. So really many, many, many fields, and I think linguistics is post-formalism, Russian formalism. Hook school, this idea of course, a morphology of lifestyles. Although if you think about Darwin and expression of morphological qualities of expression of emotions in animals and humans, as everyone has many people have noted, an important book for Vavog. There is a chronological element there that perhaps you're downplaying somewhat. I agree with you that Vavog is not like Walter Benjamin is not interested in Orchbrongh as a chronological beginning point. But yet if we look at the panels, they do move from antiquity to the present day. So he is offering us a historical atlas, one that proceeds and moves forward. I agree. In fact, I was talking of attention because I don't think that Barbara is emancipated completely from the traditional historical approach. On the contrary, it feels the tension between this and it feels attracted by the traditional historical task to reconstruct the timeline, the chronology of the phenomena. And this is there together with the other side. When Spiro says it's never one or the other, but you have to think in between. Moreover, if you read the origin of the species by Darwin, there is a paragraph on morphology. He knew very well good and he says morphology is the mother of our problems. So even in this depth that Barbara has toward Darwin, you can see in transparent but as well again. And I mean, to complicate or to swing the pendulum just a bit further, it doesn't really discuss the school, the school of Athens in the Chvamdoydong as a kind of syncrene of symptoms of appearances. I think you recall. Yes. I don't remember, but I'm not the Freudian here. The Freudians don't remember it. I'm not responsible. I do, I don't remember. Perhaps in the impression. I'm pretty sure he does. But downstairs. But perhaps an important question which was in the origin of our meeting here and our discussion was the question of plasticity, dynamic memory and unconscious. And the purpose was to revisit the new vision of unconscious and memory with the information of contemporary neurosciences. And I think it will be interesting to discuss a little about that because we can say there is a dynamic memory today in the vision of neurosciences. Very dynamic memory. And the question from neurosciences is the dichronic identity. Welcome from the dichronic identity. If we are always changing from where the permanence of yourself, the permanence of your reference, of your history, welcome from. And perhaps we have a paradox as we discussed before. In biology we have permanent change. And in cultural point of view you have something which is more in the dialectic of memory as a conservation, as continuity. And I think the discussion about continuity and discontinuity in the dynamic process of memory is interesting to have it change from the point of view. For a classical psychoanalyst we are thinking about psychoanalysis, about human sciences as the field of the possibility to change. And biology as the terminus, programmation, fixed structures. And with the new parroting of plasticity you have an understanding of the representation, perhaps more mobile in biological structure and more, in mobile in cultural structures. Is it a pity that the memory people are not here anymore? Yes, it's gay. And I know psychoanalytic memory. We can manage. I was wondering in fact myself about what we were discussing, they were discussing, you were discussing this morning. Because it is indeed one of the most interesting things that at least I think for neuroscience came out from this Varburg meeting. The thing is that the memory was discussed this morning is in fact somehow very fixed and very flexible. I mean you speak of a synaptic trace which is something that really deeply change your brain. Everything you hear, you listen, you do can change through the processes of your brain. But still it's a dynamic thing. So ongoing, even during these days, we are carrying on changing. But we perceive our self and our identity as a stable, at least if we don't run into the pathology as stable in space and time. So I was wondering if what you were saying about the variation in the theme could be somehow applied in trying to understand memory but not as a synaptic trace because it's like explaining vision with the functioning of the cells in V1, V2 or Colours in V4. There is something more, there is, you know, our story is also a narrative story of our self is something and is not only about learning what Christina was saying, memory is something you learn. I'm not sure it's something you learn, it's something you experience, something you go through, something that changed yesterday, the Victoria was saying, we are made of bricks, but you can change the disposition of these bricks. And somehow the bricks can be the variation around the theme. And so the dynamic aspect of memory could be not this variation. Yeah, the creative and plastic aspect that both reproduces and produces. I was thinking, listening to this idea of plasticity, of course, of the very famous passages in prose or even in certain phenomenology, but even in all those authors that have insisted on the retroactive retrograde movement of truth, Bexon has a beautiful conference on that, the aprecouled in Treglichkeit Borges when he says that Kafka creates his precursors or a Thomas Eliot that says in tradition an individual talent that when a new author appears in the scene in the literary landscape, the old history has to be rewritten. So briefly, the present shapes the past, the past shapes the present, and you have, again, this in between of passivity and activity, a chiasmatic relation if you want to use the Merlot-Ponten notion. And I'm not a neuroscientist, but from your comments and this course is about plasticity, I immediately connected them to this constellation of problems, which is exactly even in verbal the idea that he says the Lao-con should have been invented if it was not there, meaning that Renaissance is a construction, was there a certain amount of phenomena, but there's a retrograde creative installation of this notion of Renaissance as an aprecouled. I think there's a... No, but just to stress again, the notion that one dimension of plasticity is that it allows experience to leave traces by modifying synapses that are facilitated and then when they are reactivated, that somehow reproduce the experience more or less. And at the same time, particularly this idea that whenever... It's not an idea, it's actually an experimental observation that when traces are reactivated, as Christina mentioned, they are becoming more fragile or more susceptible to associate with others with a new concept. So nothing is lost really, but it's updated permanently. So this is in a way that try to grasp this notion of permanence and at the same time of continuous change, which is something that is paradoxical because you would say, you know, memory is something that is there, you know, once and forever. And this is really the evolving notion that it's true, but at the same time, it's susceptible to change. And all the mechanisms are not known, actually, but certainly this possibility of re-association of traces. So given trace is now put into... Associated with others in a new context. So produces this change in a way. Yes, it is important because we have to revisit the relation between nature and culture if we can say that it is a prominent change. We can say also that we are, as we said in our books, we are biologically determined not to be completely biologically determined. We are biologically determined to be free. And finally, we can say in this discussion that we are biologically determined, determined to receive the incidence of the culture. And the idea, the space for the culture is inside also the biology of the... And after it is the question, why is it like that? Why is it necessary? The incidence of the culture, we are unachieved at birth. We need the other, or this is a psychiatric psychoanalytic point of view. We need the action of the other. And we can develop these ideas, discussing about the necessity of the culture which is inside the biological organization. I found the discussion very interesting and talk provoking in particular. I've been thinking about the issue of memory. So for a psychoanalyst, there is a relevance and history to the concept of memory because Breuer Freud with his experience with Charcoal and then on his own discovered that certain manifestations in a patient, certain symptoms could be traced back to a specific memory. And that the bringing into awareness of that specific memory would alter the symptoms. In that way of looking at it, memory is a very discrete entity. So what we call memory trace, so that there are all these traces, they are discrete entities. But when you start thinking from the perspective of, let's say, plasticity, when you and Joe this morning say, well, the brain changes after this meeting or during this meeting, the brain changes. What is memory in that? There isn't a discrete, so the whole question of, and then the other thing is, Christina says, well, there is learning, well, there's learning, there's experience. And there is what Freud didn't really directly touch upon, though it's inherent in the concept of free associations, but it's not like you have a discrete experience and that experience stays isolated. It must be that all experiences are affecting each other forwards and backwards in a dynamic way. And so, within this way of saying, it's difficult to speak of memory in the usual sense we speak of it. There may have to be a different approach to understanding exactly what it is that is happening. That is, and even, and I think once you start thinking that way, the Freudian dynamic unconscious becomes something that needs to be revisited. Yes, and perhaps the limit between memory, dynamic memory, and dynamic unconscious, Freudian unconscious, is less clear than before. For us, we consider that unconscious was, Freudian theory is not a memory system. But if we enter in plasticity, dynamic memory, we have something new in the confrontation between unconscious and memory. And finally, it's easier to understand what is unconscious than what is memory. Well, but in classical Freudian thinking, unconscious or dynamic unconscious is connected to the notion of repression, which means the memory is not becoming conscious for a reason. Whereas it may be that memory is not becoming conscious, just further from being whatever needs to bring it into awareness, into consciousness, is not happening. So if you don't listen to that piece of music for 30 years, that memory you could say is unconscious, you could even say in a speculative Freudian way, you kept that memory out of your consciousness because it happened during your adolescence, you were sexually into this and it kept it. But it may just be that you didn't have the method of accessing it, and when you accessed it with the repeat of the same music, it came right back. But this gives a very discrete perspective or retrieval too. So, and your example was incredibly good in showing that even the retrieval aspect of memory is not discrete. You don't have to... Exactly. So, I think what I was just an idyllarium thinking of your description of the original, this variation around the theme, it would give to memory a more complex structure. So, I don't know exactly how it could be formalized, but... I think the difficulty of addressing these issues, the relationship between memory and unconscious, the notion of form, where the form comes from, the problem of the ure, or even the related problem of self-identity, bring us back to a key point of our ontology, of our epistemology, which is language. And there's a passage that keeps obsessing me, which I totally, by chance, found in a wonderful book by Premolévi, that's drawn and the saved. I don't have the English, but I can... It's very short. I have the Italian one. What we commonly conceive of as understanding, he writes, coincides with simplifying. Without a deep simplification, the world around us would be an endless undefined knot that would challenge our ability to orient and decide upon our action. We are, to put it simply, forced to reduce the knowable to schema. And this is the specific purpose of the wonderful instrument we built in the course of evolution, which is just specific of the human species. Language and conceptual thought. So, I think Premolévi here is dealing with a completely different issue. What does it mean to survive ausch with... what does it mean to feel guilty of something, etc. But if you somehow use this as a starting point to reflect upon many of the themes that we have been discussing during these days, I think that the notion of identity can be much better tackled from our point of view, from the neurobiological point of view, if you interpret it as a process, and not as... So, there is no such a thing in the brain as the self. The self is a process, a dynamic process. Which, in a way, is a way not to answer in the question, okay, a process of what? So, then the neurobiologist desperately needs something to grab in order not to be completely drawn in this sort of indeterminacy, universal indeterminacy. And this something to grab on are the bricks that metaphorical is speaking, I was alluding to. So, going back to Várburg, Francois said, each of us has probably had, or his own, Várburg. One of the things that really struck me of Várburg is his definition of the history of art as the history of human pragmatic expression, which immediately in my head suggested the possibility not to naturalize the history of art. That's not the way to put it. But at least they attempt to naturalize the process of morphogenesis. And then, Várburg reading of Gerta and the tradition that Andrea was very briefly referring to offer a sort of kind of very remote, but not totally crazy goal, which is specifically that of looking for possible biological roots of symbolic forms. And I think that in that respect, Várburg definitely, at the very least, I don't see him as standing against this project. But I think that by reading Várburg perhaps in my very own idiosyncratic way, I think Várburg would not and would encourage this sort of search. And then I will stop. The notion of a form that is not the primitive form, but being instantiated in a variety of ways still keeps some constant aspect reminds me of the notion discussed by Agamben radicalizing a paradigm by Aristotle. So according to a gamble, this is specific of our species. The possibility to achieve something that cannot be universal, but being paradigmatic becomes, so to speak, by means of decoupling, something from his usual reference role, he makes the example of Rosa. Rose is a word referring to a biological object, but when decoupled from his role of referring to something in the physical world, when it becomes one element of the latent declination, Rosa, Rosa, it doesn't refer to any specific roles, it becomes a paradigm. So I believe the same logic can perhaps be applied to the notion of morphogenesis and can be perhaps fruitfully tackled from an all biological point of view. So that's the main reason why we decided to confront scribbles with the Chinese ideograms and alphabetical Roman letters. So, and if I had the power to do it, one project I would really like to pursue would be to look among all known possible writing that we know along human history, to look for specific biomechanical constraints, kinematic bricks that somehow, so I mean the way we are, it's a dynamic process. I am not the same as I was 20 years ago. Before becoming a father, my attention started one meter above the ground. Whatever was moving below one meter didn't exist. Now, all of a sudden I become a father. I discovered the world is full of children of this kind of thing. So I am not anymore the Victoria or the single... Clayboard. It's a red set. Somebody from person. So the idea is that this is something that can be investigated. And I think verbal in a way can be a source of inspiration. But I mean, maybe I am just reading what you say in light of what I think. But the point I made this morning about these hardwired, maybe neuronal circuits in a way that respond to certain archetypal biomechanical shapes and patterns I mean, for me, can be related to what verbal is identified as persisting over time. And then, of course, based on this, they can re-emerge and be reinterpreted and find their life on their own through plasticity, through culture, through a given moment in time. But there is a constant invariant throughout time and cultures that is based on some biological property. So I think we shared the same point. But it might be interesting to make a distinction between images and text, right? Between images and language. And it's interesting that Valbuk seemed to have... You really had a hard time with writing. I mean, I don't know what your experience is, but my experience of reading Valbuk is God was not only in the details, but he got lost in the details. And you can feel a certain compulsive inability to extract... Let alone the handwriting. You know exactly. And then stopping the project. So we have to think about that. There was something... And when he came to Numosina, he really didn't get the text done. He died before the text was finished. But the idea of these pictures speaking. And you know Freud talks about mental images, not external images, but mental images as phylogenetically and ontologically older, of course, than language, which we know they are. So it would be interesting to hear people talk about this distinction, which is related to conceptual questions and morphology. I love the example of Primo Levy, because I mean, Valbuk would describe to it immediately in the sense that this is what he thought in Vissure and the Viconians that he was reading. This is what the symbol is. But then I would just want to add to that and complicate that with what Andrea, by mentioning invoking Gerta and the Gertian symbol, was precisely what Valbuk did not want to have, because for him the symbol had to be discursive. It had to be endlessly metonymic. It couldn't have that romantic Gertian symbolic power, because it was too complicated. It was too oscillating. It was too unstable. My impression is that the effect in between various the tradition Christ or Baccofen, that is a symbol is something dense, complex. When you narrate it and you describe it, you have the exegesis of the symbol, and then you have the myth. And then you recount the history of the serpent as a escapious, and so you decline and you inflect it towards the good, towards the positive pole. Otherwise you can describe it and recount and narrate it in the myth of Lao-Kon, so the exegesis determines the symbol and its density towards the direction. But it also undermines it. It doesn't allow it simply to be the serpent or the flag or the chalice. It becomes iconographic, as well as I call it. I have a question to your argument, your excellent argument of Victoria Gédese. We are speaking about biological roots of form. Or a biological necessity of the form, because something is missing in the programme of the human being. We are without instruction for use. We are unachieved at birth. And we need also something from the other. And perhaps we need the form. For me it's different to say, perhaps it's the same, it's different. But it is important, not the biological root, if like if it was inscribed in your programme, but the biological necessity of the form. It's like the distinction, excuse me, like the social between language and speech. Each act of speech, each speech act, modifies the system of the language. And you have this kind of dialectic with an endless permanent change. Or with the necessity of the form, but the possibility not to find the true form, but to recreate permanently endless new form from another form. And for me, Warburg is very interesting, because in Nemo's sign he put together different kinds of forms that are unified by their necessity, and not by the common root. If I could pick up on what you said about text and image, I was reminded listening this morning and now that in fact in Warburg, late years, which are dedicated to his own recovery, there's two great words that have the same title, at least Nemozine. The first is the builder, Al-Aza, and the second is the library, so you have text and image. And this also reminded me of a very short text that I give to students when I introduce the library and the expectation of how to find your reading list, etc. And I read very short text by Verbal, which describes the library as an off-claroon-vaff, a weapon of enlightenment. And to me, that seems to be a very powerful way of inverting is phobia with gun and turning the library into something very dynamic and very organized at the same time, because the library has quite a clear organization. It's organized chronologically, there's an alphabetical order, so it represents time, and it also is subdivided by space. So it's indeed a space of self-healing and of creating a space where you can navigate himself. Hello? This isn't a direct response to what has been said. But when you refer to the library as a weapon, I think that it's something to bear in mind. And that is Varbar's relationship to the world around him, which was very close, very attentive, very conscious and self-conscious. When we speak of his identity, there's something very problematic for him in a socio-political sense, and that includes his family, includes religious background, and he was constantly negotiating this with himself, within the family, with others, and who he was socio-politically, was on his mind. And that the creation of the library was not just an intellectual act, not just a projected psychological woman, but a socio-political one, that he negotiated with his family, through his family, and that continual concern with where he fit within the society, the politics of his time, his identity with his class, with his state, but his problems with that, his identity with Judaism and his ambivalence there, his attention as Peter pointed out to anti-Semitism and what he could do about that. This remained constantly of importance to him. And so all I would say is that in the discussion of his intellectuality and his relationship to the intellectual traditions, with which he is dealing, I think his socio-political sense and background just sort of helps in some way to understand what stays with him, what he decides to pursue. That little aphorism fits very well into what you said, because it continues the library as a weapon of enlightenment against orthodox materialism, and he says, Luther, the French Revolution, science, liberating the right to think for oneself. But I think that really fits very, very squarely into that discourse. As I've been listening to the way that each of us has been thinking about Warburg, I wonder if in one sense he's an ego ideal of something that the psychoanalyst, Rothenburg, refer to a Genucian process of thinking after the Roman god Janus, where there's an active and intentional conception of two or more opposites simultaneously that is very much like primary process thinking with the equivalents of opposites, but is actually a conscious, intentional, rational process that also obeys reality testing. And that this is something that we recognize perhaps in Warburg, and so many of the comments have been attempts, rather than maybe trying to find the middle ground, reconciling opposites, whether it was kind of an Aristotelian and platonic undercurrent to what you were, yes, and it's not finding the midpoint, but we're all sort of, you know, I think in a way, fashioning or thinking after Warburg, and this is what I think we see as so ideal about him. In this context, I want to bring up the seismograph. You know, Valba really felt he was a seismograph, and if you think about it, I've had this much humbler metaphor about my own nerves, which is a tuning fork. You see how humble that one is compared to the seismograph, but the seismograph is, you know, picking up earthquakes. And you feel this in the sensibility, and this might be, this is obviously personal, it's subjective, and I have noticed that, you know, people want to walk very carefully for human and good reason, respectfully, around the subjective reality of what it was like to be Abi Vabhupa, that we can't know, of course, but we can guess through this particular metaphor of the seismograph, that he was a person who was picking up a lot, and you feel it in the psychotic material, and you feel it before that, and you feel it after. Sure. Even in 2019, he uses the metaphor of the antenna as well. Yes, there you go, the same thing. Okay, I think we could stop here and be open for questions. Return it. No, you want to make one last comment before we close? Yeah, because Siri introduced this very delicate issue text image, and of course, in visual culture studies, it's a main issue, word versus image. I was wondering whether exactly reading a barber and looking at the panels, we are not perhaps too radically opposing these two systems and registers. Both for our past and the etymological reason, that is the Greek verb graphane means both to depict and to write, and the same happens in ancient Egyptian language, in Gothic language. Victoria was mentioning the Chinese ideograms, pictograms. We encounter text and image icon text as many people in the visual culture say in advertising, on the web, in our books, even on the panels of Nemo's Unem. So I was wondering, and I'd like to ask you as neuroscientists, if such a division between a separation between the responses and the reactions and the processes in the brain with words and with images, is something useful, or if we shouldn't rather develop a method to approach in a holistic way. The whole thing. Short answer, I'm not sure how the actual present-day neuroscientific research goes on exploring world versus image. Perhaps my feeling is in a separate way that our regions processing our relationship towards regions, processing our relationship to images, responses and so on. Is there a research nowadays questioning the way we respond to icon text? Well, I'm not aware, but that doesn't mean necessarily anything. One of the very interesting discoveries that neuroscience has made recently when comes to the relationship between symbolic graphic science and the brain, I'm referring to the research of Stanislav Dehann. Of coin, people in Paris who have discovered that apparently there's a part of our visual brain, which is specifically and uniquely activated by letters, but not by numbers, for example. So it's not the pragmatic component which specifically leads to this activation, but is something brand new in terms of evolutionary time. It's just an eyeballing 6,000 years of, against the history of at least more than 100,000 years. So what is this? I tend to be inclined to an exoptation perspective. So I don't think our mind can be described metaphorically as a swiss army knife. No, don't you respect? That is wonderful tool. But I don't think our mind can be modeled in that particular way. I don't think that every cognitive abilities is necessarily the outcome of its specific adaptive value, but I stick to gold and leaventh in the spanners of some Mark of famous paper where they introduced the notion of exoptation. So to put it simply, nature is a sort of bricolor. So you have something that evolved to answer some specific pressure and you somehow transformed dynamically. Perhaps you use the very same bricks, but the same bricks dynamically connected in a different way can accomplish different things. So what is remarkable is that a trace, a footprint for an animal at best can speak of some other animal that was passing by. In our case, the handprint is a sort of vindication of our identity. So I am. And it's amazing how many handprints are discovered. I have a friend who is an archaeologist, Maurizio Fort. He studies the Neolithic period, Catalyuk in an atoria. And he was telling me that all of these houses in a very specific, detailed, very much ritual-like form, there are thousands of these handprints on specific walls. I don't remember if they, with respect to the cardamom points, there is also a rule in that respect. Which is a way of asserting our identity or whatever. I mean, you probably will never know. So this is a real challenge for a biologist because we are dealing with an aspect of human nature that too many is beyond any reach of the empirical sciences. I tend to be rather optimistic or delusional. I think we have a chance. Okay, we have one comment on that. Oh yeah, I wanted to ask a question and just kind of follow up on that. You know, Cassierer following Warburg looked at man as the Animal Sinbolicum. So, and his Cassierer's example was, give me a line. And it's all in the context. It's our ability to bring to that line whether it's a mathematical graphical formulation or an aesthetic calligraphic expression or whether it's a numerical symbol. And so, what I found to be interesting and I wanted to know what the neurophysiological opinion might be on this, that there's work done by Stephen Costland and others. That says the brain actually projects in the visual courtesies, iconic resemblances to the affordances that we see, that we pay attention to. That the curves that we see are actually modeled two dimensionally on surfaces in the visual courtes. At some point there's got to be like an interpreter that's grading and evaluating like maybe the interpreter, Gazonega talks about. Is there any literature that talks about this? The word interpreter is a scary one because you don't want to fall into the moncolous trap. So, the interpreter is at best an emergent property of the whole system. I would put it in that specific way. The vision has been, in my opinion, so far too much studied and conceived of within the limit of vision itself. As we were discussing yesterday, unimodality is not the rule, it's the exception in the brain. So, synesthesia apparently is rules. I have the suspect that a very viable rule to glue this otherwise patchwork like a world of our perceptions of the world is action, is the mortal system. By means of back projection. So, it's not only a matter of top-down effect, like when you see a shaded confused pattern, you don't see anything, then I ask you, oh, don't you see the dalmatian dog? Okay, that's a clear example of a top-down influence on early processing. These role of back projection has been either neglected or not sufficiently explored from a neurobiological point of view. People who study the visual system from an anatomical point of view systematically emphasize the fact that recurrent connections, by and large, exceed feed-forward connection. So, there are a lot more fibers that travels back from V1 to the lateral geniculate body than fibers that from the towns gets to the primary visual cortex. That problem means something, which is, I think, also very coherent with the notion of perception that has been discussed during this today. So, it's a sort of multimodal enterprise. And I think if one changed this perspective, even the study of images, the study of econology can have a new boost, I think. We still have to map uncharted territory that can perhaps give some food for thought, also for discipline, that in principle don't need the contribution of neurobiology, but I think they can profit of this contribution. And vice versa, of course. Thank you all very, very much. And that's it. Thank you.