We're going to start the meeting.
Francois, sir, may we introduce the participants of this roundtable.
So if you would please sit down and we can get going.
Okay, I have to present this roundtable about Nemo Sin, the roundtable about memory and unconscious.
The definition and the different limits between the question of unconscious and the question
of memory.
In this roundtable, there are people that I know very well like Kristina Alberini, who
is professor of neuroscience at NIU here in New York, and working about reconciliation.
We are collaborating with Guillermo Gistretti and I with Kristina Alberini about the question.
I have to present also Siri Housvet.
I can say what little world about you because everybody knows your books and reading your
books.
I remember that Pierre said that in one of your books, you said that reconciliation is something
like aprecur.
And he asked me what I was thinking about the relation between reconciliation and aprecur.
I said no, I don't agree.
And after I said yes, that you were right, that I am very happy to see you and perhaps
to discuss after with you about the notion of aprecur.
And he is also Joseph Sledou.
Joseph Sledou is well known for all the work about emotional memory and this famous book
for me too was very important, the emotional brain and all the works that were about traumatic
experience and memory and different emotional memory, emotional center of memory.
And also Kristo Fargenson, who I discover here and he is professor of Spanish early
modern literature at UCLA.
And Pierre Magistetti, that I know well, but I don't know how to present you.
We are working about neuroscience and psychoanalysis, but you are specialized in the energetic
of the brain and astrocytes and he is a famous neuroscientist and president now of the Ebro,
international brain research organization.
And we are together in Agalma Foundation in relation with the Elic Center discussing about
Vahburg and now it's time for the wrong table.
Thank you.
So I wanted to begin by following a thread that was thankfully begun in the last session
and it has to do with method and memory, the topic of our session.
The idea really is whether or not after he comes out of Kojtlingen, he produces or cultivates
what he calls in a letter to Binswanger discussing the Cesseteses, discussing the 1920s A on German
astrology, what Vahburg terms historical psychology and how Vahburg's own projects in the last
five years fit in with this historical psychology.
He says in this wonderful volume that David Aes, D'Amilly co-edits in a Vahburg rights
in an autobiographical sketch.
This is therefore in 1924 after Kojtlingen's diagnosis of manic depression has, as a word
is being now applied and therefore Vahburg is on his way to healing and he's looking forward
to going back to Hamburg and he's writing an autobiographical sketch and he recalls a
time when he was six years old and suffered a mild, what he calls a mild, of typhoid
fever and he says at that time began the fear of quoting, disproportional, context less,
context less or without a context, memories of images.
So my question is how does he, with the Bilda Atlas, name wasune Bilda Atlas, it has many
titles, Vahburg could never settle on a particular title, how does he, with this constellation
of images, there were about a thousand images, 63 or 72 different Tothan panels, screens,
screen memories perhaps even, how does he come up with a new method by which he can
oscillate between the immediate demonic sensual, these are all words that Vahburg uses and
the ecstatic prudential, wise, calm, mediated pole, or I mean he literally talks about
swinging between both poles, now the Atlas is, as we have it, largely wordless and it
is based on a method that is frequently diagrammatic, if we look at his notebooks, if we look at
the Zetto Kesten, he's not able to write it out anymore, he's not able, he was never,
he always had difficulty as Gombrick and others have noted with polished academic prose, instead
he condenses, he uses the word fadictus, his ideas, and he condenses them so dramatically
in the non-verbal Atlas that the de-demonization process that Vahburg sees as both personal
and cultural is achieved, so he moves in a chronological fashion from ancient Greece
to 1929 in Rome, in the course of the 63 panels, but that motion is not only cultural, chronological,
historical, but it's personal in that in many of the panels he is repeating his own research,
he's revisiting his own research, so it's a form of personal memory and cultural memory,
maybe just one last anecdote really, the last panel ends with the Eucharist, or he's meditating
on the Eucharist, so we know that this was a kind of redemptive gesture on the part of
Vahburg, both a religious and a redemptive gesture, but in light of some of the number
of people every kind of the accident or the anecdote that in Christ again he felt that
he was being poisoned with human blood, that he was forced to consume human blood.
Clearly, Vahburg was able to transform that, displace that by metonymy, by his art of combination
in the Atlas, maybe one further postscript is that he also becomes obsessed by the work
of Giardano Bruno in his last year of life, and he sees that as another intellectual project
that can satisfy his method and the fact that Cassieva, both in letters to Vahburg in this
period and in his funeral oration for Vahburg in 29, confirmed that Vahburg's method was
the right one to make sense of Bruno.
I think again, these are other examples of his historical psychology that goes between
image and work.
Okay, I'm going to try to make a bridge because we have an expert on Abi Vahburg sitting next
to me.
I've read your book and he really knows his stuff, and then we have three neurosciences,
one who is written with a psychoanalyst, so I'm going to try to make a bridge about
memory in the unconscious so that we have a way of crossing it, because what happens
in these discussions is that there are epistemological and methodological differences.
So people working in labs need controlled circumstances and you need to be able to reproduce
your results.
You do not need to do that.
You need to have important insights about metaphor and Vahburg, and you can write a beautiful
book.
I'm a novelist.
I don't need any of it.
But I think it's really crucial that we think about how this is going to work.
So we have essentially here, if we're going to talk about the unconscious, first of all,
we have a dynamic Freudian unconscious, something I think we're all here at this table familiar
with.
We have something now called, has been called the cognitive unconscious.
And if we remember in behaviorism, this wasn't even talked about in the early 20th century.
It came about later.
Now neuroscientists are talking about all kinds of higher cognitive material that is
part of unconsciousness that can, some of it, which can be brought to memory.
The Vahburgian unconscious, you will have to help me with.
It seems to me that what Vahburg is talking about is a kind of collective unconscious
that is perhaps more related to Jung in some ways than to Freud, but it's not clear.
The one science link that I found to Vahburg memory and the unconscious is Richard Zeemon,
the German scientist on memory who really got lost.
I started looking at it.
He was a Lamarckian, but as we know, not that Lamarck has returned, but there are studies
in epigenetics where there are shocks or stresses delivered to mice which change methylation,
which then can be inherited.
Interesting little link possibly.
Kristina knows a lot more about this than I do, and maybe you should take the ball from
there.
I'm trying to make little connective tissue so that we have something to talk about together
about the function of memory and how it works for Vahburg.
There's a 19th century, 20th century example of a scientist working on memory who had some
insights that Vahburg borrowed and transformed.
Now I throw it to Kristina.
I'll take it from there and just to start the discussion.
I'm going to talk about memory in general, so what we define as memory and how is this
related to the unconscious.
We define memory, anything we learn, and then we keep as information over time.
There are already keywords here.
Learning, which is something that is perceived and changed in the brain as an oral scientist.
Then it's maintained over time, so there is the other important issue of time.
This already goes away a little bit, takes some space from the unconscious because there
is no time in that.
We can talk about that.
Is there for memory always conscious, of course not.
We know not only in psychoanalysis but in psychology and in neuroscience more and more
that many of the experiences remain in a place that is non-conscious and therefore by definition
unconscious.
Does that mean that is the Freudian unconscious?
That's going to be up for debate and discussion.
We actually wrote a paper together with Pierre and Francois exactly about these topics, so
perhaps Pierre can take it from there.
I comment about Freudian unconscious, cognitive unconscious, many types of unconscious.
Obviously needs to be defined because the word unconscious is common to all of them,
but do they have anything to do with each other?
Freud himself wrote that memory is actually an unconscious process or the memory trace
to be more precise is an unconscious entity.
The memory of the trace can be conscious, so he is distinguishing what is inside that
is maintained, let's say in the brain, the brain body connection, that is unconscious
but the memory of it of something is the conscious part.
So clearly in this trace there is something conscious that can be brought to consciousness
and the remains in the unconscious.
There is a lot that can be discussed and certainly a lot of interest, particularly in I am very
interested in that, in understanding the memories during development, which are very linked
to the psychoanalytic issues in question, how much are they conscious or unconscious?
Then is the process of consciousness coming in and are these traces, these memory traces
maintained and influenced our behavior later on, which is the answer is obviously yes.
So here we can connect about the perceptions of an artist making the work of art or thinking
or visualizing anything, any perception.
How much is that connected to memories?
Memories besides that is a biologically essential function for life without memories we will
not survive is also a very important part of the individuality of who we are.
And there is a lot of connection to emotions and then Joe is going to tell us more about
the emotions.
So there is so much to go through, I think I will stop here and I will leave it to you.
Maybe I can take it from your distinction of three unconscious cognitive Freudian and
what you mentioned the Warburgian unconscious.
I think Christina already made a first pass to the first two cognitive and Freudian and
we can get back.
I mean as you say there is still a lot to be said.
But the quote unquote Warburgian unconscious, which you, until yesterday I never thought
that that could have anything to do with what you mentioned, some sort of collective
unconscious because for me it is very difficult to understand the notion of consciousness
collective unconscious.
So let me try to give you what I think about it.
I have been thinking about this quite intensively obviously because of this immersion since
yesterday.
That resonates by the way with what you were saying initially the cultural and the personal
memory.
It is another way, so this contrast, this paradox between something personal and something
cultural or collective I think is a question in the Warburgian unconscious.
Let us call it.
What does it mean?
So initially when with Vittorio and Francois we thought of this gathering here, I think
one of the starting point was the notion of Navelleben.
So this idea that there is something, as Jor-Vivolscom says, something that remains over time maybe
is updated at different times and cultures.
But there is these patterns that reemerge through different stages of culture.
It is something that is puzzling.
So it has something to do with memory but how do you talk about memory being maintained
across centuries and cultures, unless you speak of this collective unconscious which
I don't really think exists.
So how do you connect this?
So you can take two approaches.
One is, and I think that's the one that triggered our interest, is the idea that also, and Kristina
has worked a lot on this, the idea that traces are made after an experience and then somehow
there is the memory is very dynamic.
It can be updated, there are new associations of traces.
And one could say, when Navelleben is kind of a concept that has a resonance with some
neurobiological aspects of memory that there are traces that are re-abdated, re-associated
with time.
But it's really purely conceptual because the notion of trace re-association, of reconciliation
is linked to a single individual.
So how can you imagine that this goes on across centuries?
So it works as a model but I don't think it works in practice to explain this verborgian
unconscious.
So it's an idea that I put here with all the, because we are completely open and discussed.
But I just thought that, how about if there are some patterns that activate in a particularly
strong way or patterns of neurons that it's an invariant of the human species, at least
over these two or three thousand years that we're talking about.
And somehow they generate some emotional response or some, even maybe cognitive response or
something.
So there is kind of a signature in certain patterns that is an invariant across time
and space.
And maybe something very primitive.
I can't actually help but thinking of in one of your early papers in the Scientific
American, you had a man in a forest hitting with a rod, a snake.
And the idea that the snake would go through the low way, the talamus amigdala and generate
this very fast response, not at all cognitively interpreted, which is the long way through
the primary sensory cortex and then back to.
So as a pure speculation, is it possible that these patterns that verborg identified and
that we can group under this idea of the verborgian unconscious actually reflect a neurobiological
reality of very simple or even complex patterns that are an invariant in neuronal circuitry
and then that triggers certain type of energy, if you wish, which then are then integrated
in much more elaborated productions such as the giérlandaleo or your name.
So this is my take.
I think maybe it is possible to talk about some kind of biological there there.
What happened yesterday I think is that in certain strains of poststructuralist French
thought, the body as a non-ideological, non-textual phenomenon vanished, which is I think the
spat about La Con and Malle Punti was connected to this, that there is real biology and neurology
in Malle Punti in a way that La Con's relationship to drive theory, which I think there are people
here that can explain it better than I understood it, but it is changed.
He really revises that in relation to what is happening in French thinking of the period.
But if we can agree that there is some kind of biological route to human experience, which
I think there is, then this is from Vareberg's journal and I think maybe Joe will have something
to say about this.
He says, the inherited consciousness of maximized impressions stamped on the mind, engram,
engram, passes them on without taking cognizance of the direction of their emotional charge
simply as an experience of energy tensions, this sounds a little like Freud, this unpolarized
continuum, the imparting of a new meaning, you can think of that as Freud drives attaching
to an object, to these energies serves as a protective screen.
Joe, this sounds like you.
This is Bobo, this is Bobo, but I know Joe can pick up on this.
I want to start with something that Christopher said about the arrangement of these images
and the dynamic that is going on between conscious and unconscious processes.
Let's really simplify it and think of the conscious perceptual mind as one thing and
everything else underneath as more implicit systems that operate unconsciously.
What about the Freudian unconscious, all of that other stuff and just talk about it as
pure wiring of the brain?
Some things are unconscious simply because they don't have connectivity with the systems
that make consciousness.
We could call it cognitive unconscious, but a lot of emotion stuff is like that too.
We'll just call it the implicit of psychological unconscious.
Let's say he's there ranging these pictures, his conscious mind is looking at it, but his
unconscious mind is controlling his behavior.
The actual arrangement physically of the images is probably being done independent of what
he's consciously thinking.
That's how you're getting these.
You make a move, you put this here just intuitively and now it's part of your consciousness.
That gets incorporated into your present state.
Now you make another move and so it's a dance between the conscious and the unconscious
as all of life is every moment.
I see that as how these systems are interacting, but now to bring in emotion and universal
unconscious.
There are definitely things that are wired into the brain that we're sensitive to, whether
it's the certain shapes, the visual cortex for example, has things that it's innately
sensitive to in terms of angles and lines and contrast between stimulants and so forth.
There are more complex things that we might think of in a psychological sense such as
the snake on the ground.
We know that the low road that you talked about, which takes information into the amygdala,
which is important for detecting danger, the low road takes that information in, but it
has nothing, has no way to convey psychology.
All it has is curvature, intensity and those sorts of features.
The guy that's walking in the woods in this picture and is about to step on the snake and
freezing before he steps on the snake is not responding to the snake.
He's responding to a curve shape on the ground that activates this archetypal image that has
been threatening to our ancestors and our animal ancestors and all the way back down for millennia
and causing him to stop to freeze.
Just as you walk out on 2nd Avenue and the bus goes flying by and you jump back and afterwards
you consciously become afraid, the brain has this kind of capacity to respond this way.
As you know, many phobias are based on these kinds of archetypal stimuli, whether it's
snakes and spiders and heights and blood and things like that or social situations where
you're not in a sense of uncontrolled is present.
There are lots of things that go on below the surface of consciousness that then we
consciously recognize and incorporate into ourself, our mind, our personality, including
our own behavior.
So we act in a certain way that becomes part of our conscious perception of who we are
and in fact we learn a lot about who we are through the way we act.
I'm just going to say this, you can relate this back I think to actually trauma as something
important in Valvo and also to the images you mentioned first connected to the typhoid
fever.
And trauma and learned fear responses which is something that Joe has also written about
I think are very much implicated in Valvo's life but also in his theoretical position
about the shock that returns and you know Valvo I'm giving it to you.
Well I was picking up on the notion of the Valvo walking in unconscious in the distance
between or how we might move from a conscious level.
The first phrase in the introduction to name Azune is conscious creation of distance.
He insists upon the fact that he is this is a practice that this project is going to show
the means by which he moves from the demonic to something more ecstatic or more mediated
something something controllable and the fact that he insists on Nietzsche's polarity between
the Dionysian and the Apollonian in the same text suggests to me that he's realizing that
the method that he of collating combining separating which he worked on with collaborators
but mainly was it was Valvo himself who insisted on the arrangement of the images was the means
by which he could de demonize quote unquote these images but implicitly also his own past
and his own demons.
So if you take people into the lab and make them afraid of something create a threatening
stimulus by pairing something with shock or so forth and then re-expose them to that
stimulus and ask them to think about a pleasant field of daisies or something like that you
can lower the the response of the autonomic nervous system and also reduce the amygdala
activity to that threat by arranging a context for it so it sounds like this is similar to
what he's doing.
It's similar I'm just afraid from the sort of philological comparison perspective that
we're losing the historical richness of Valvo's knowledge that he knew things about the history
of astrology the history of cosmography the history of art that history of literature
that allowed him to as you suggested in your last as you suggested in your last sentence
to lower the fear factor as a her.
But at least when I sense is that and again you formulated it by speaking about cultural
versus personal memory I think there are two aspects that one can bring to the discussion
one is the the motivations let cool them or the drives that made Warburg organize the
images in a certain way in Nemozin in the Atlas and and and that is clearly the result
of his personal life his personal.
Yeah I mean it's his unconscious drives and then his intuition about Naheleben these the
constancy the the persistence the surveillance of of certain antique patterns and that relates
to to the other point I was trying to make and to to propose to this maybe there are
these archetypal forms that are not that nothing to do with a collective unconscious but simply
with a biological reality and and and actually I was discussing last night with the under
Pinoti about something that resonates with this and is the notion of ou built by Dülke
and so this idea that there are certain prime primal or original or original images that
that I have nothing mythical actually they have some they're biological for our species.
Yes and I think I think you're right we don't want to fall into some kind of reductive position
at least I don't maybe other people do where you're reducing this very complex historical
and intellectual reality to say a part of the brain.
Are we trying to understand him or are we trying to get more general ideas about the
mind or I think for example the idea of Dankram you can move this across fields so this idea
of distance or Dankram subject object can I think be related to unconsciousness or pre-reflective
self-consciousness and reflective self-consciousness in in phenomenology or Kierkegaard said immediacy
a motor sensory immediate you know perceptions that are coming into the body versus reflection
so and this would relate to what you call the slow road in fear perception right so there's
this immediate response to the snake on you know in front of you where your whole body
is just in alarm mode and then there are the slower responses that have cognitive functions
higher cognitive functions. So what this makes me think is perhaps the load of emotions
and the demons attached to it so it's overwhelming it's emotions and then making this space or
taking the distance by giving a context by giving something that is attached to it so
that a story can be made or a continuity so that something can be said from the beginning
to the end and that is a way to move from the pure emotional state that is overwhelming
and therefore may be therapeutic. And you're really figuring the fundamental metaphor that
Bobo uses well in all throughout the 20s namely the Vanda Strassa that the road by which he
moves from the demonic through to something more reason more prudential but then of course
he re-encounters the demonic maybe in 1929 Rome that it's never it's never unlike Gomberich
Snyol Kantian account of a Boboque career intellectual career and George has said this
in his book wonderfully it's never there's it's Boboque spot is not teleological never
comes to an end a nice calm settled synthesis and so that he's always re-encountering these
images in both in a manner that requires mediation and memory and the kind of work that you are
describing. In a form possibly of visual narrative and maybe that's my narrative obsession but
I do think it's making conscious meanings out of the terror I mean the the archetypal
motor sensory visual overload is the flashback that you're just there's no linguistic material
there. Exactly. There's no linguistic material so I think that the Varburgian reality is
negotiating exactly what you said the demonic is this motor sensory terror. He talks about
something like I have it somewhere the melancholy you know the the tranquility or no the oh
god it's cannibalistic fury and melancholic something or other here it is. Entire range
of emotional gesture and now he's talking about the image from helpless melancholy to
murderous cannibalism. Yes. Although I just that he in fact consists that the possibilities
of using his method can result in either this the ecstatic or the melancholic. Yeah. And this
is after having the initial he uses the phrase which is very Nietzschean nerve and rights
the initial initial pull draw of the of the nerves of the feelings of this bodily the
corporeal and then the abstracted even mathematical view of images that he condemns in for instance
Hellenistic astrology. It's either too visceral or too abstracted and Varburg is looking for
a middle road a middle path in which both the immediate and the abstracted can be in some
sort of balance. Therefore he's interested in logos and mythos at the same time. Yeah.
And hallucination is an interesting aspect of this. How so? Well the hallucinations that
he remembers from his childhood the and the fact that that he does organize his thinking
in a kind of bipolar way. And that then he has a psychotic break which is not just a
break but it lasts for years. Right. Which he then recovers from I think in a way through
Dankham. Through this therapeutic aspect of finding the distance through both writing
and maybe arranging his mind. Yes. These complexes of images. Just fascinating.
And he was extraordinarily keen to have acknowledgement from his peers that this new method of the
build a higher technique of sequences of images that it would successfully help others mediate
this polarity. The famous example of him traveling to visit Einstein and show him some
of the cosmographical images in this form of visual autonomy. And that Einstein was impressed
and agreed and could argue with him about the mathematics of it suggested to Varburg that
he had succeeded in finding a technique or method. Yeah. But I think also someone in
the last session Ernst Chris was mentioned. And Chris talks about an aesthetic barrier
in art in creativity. That in a way preserves the artist from you know complete ego disintegration
in these imaginative flight. This is a this is a linked thought that the aesthetic barrier
is what Varburg is trying to set up. And the stakes are very high in his case.
But what just go back to this archetypal images that can then be re-put into different context.
I mean the for example we show the images that we saw yesterday in Georges presentation.
I mean the angle of the foot I mean this and and with all that it brings in terms of you
know representations. I mean that is a very specific pattern that may have been remained
across centuries. And that's what I was saying again activating particular circuits but then
or neurons actually. But then obviously it's it's contextualized you know in a painting by
Guillermo and I or in in others. So this detail that he points and mentions often this and
others but the notion of detail that he gives so much importance maybe again I don't want
to be reductionistic but maybe it has a biological underpinning. Yeah well and I think if we bring
up Vittorio and you know mirror systems in the brain that are you know working preconceptually
and you know those wonderful tapes about dancers who are watching other dancers. And how the
activation is different from just a lay person like myself watching a dancer. So there you
know there are these this is not a conscious connection but it activates you know motor
sensory parts of ourselves and this may be a link to Valbo as you say. Not talking about
a Jungian collective unconscious but certain aspects of human experience that are well to
risk the word universal. And maybe you know Joe the notion of how the body is engaged I
mean in terms of the somatic states in emotions maybe again I mean that's also an aspect I
think in when he speaks I'm not sure maybe you have to correct me but he said you have
patos formel is it some kind of affect some kind of emotion that such patterns can generate
you know maybe there also there is a connection with you know something that from the amygdala
activates endocrine or autonomic responses. There are certain systems in the brain obviously
they control our autonomic nervous system and the patterns that occur often are in response
to movement in response to behavior to meet the metabolic demands of the behavior. So if
you move your arm you've got to get blood in there and as you begin to move it you're
using energy until you have to resupply the energy. So every movement requires that the
brain orchestrates set of responses to adjust the physiology of the body to that system.
And all of those physiological responses whether they're of the autonomic nervous system or
the endocrine system are providing signals that then feed back to the brain as is the
movement itself through the proprioceptive systems. So there's a tremendous amount of
information coming back to the brain and I'm not necessarily talking about it in the
sense of the demazio kind of creating a feeling but it's certainly affecting the information
processing functions of the brain in a massive way. So all of the hormones that are released
for example cortisol is very important it's released in the adrenal gland goes into the
brain and binds to the amygdala, hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, you name it it's a hypothalamus
it's all over the brain and so it's going to affect the way all of those systems are
responding to the external world whether they're processing information implicitly or unconsciously
or in a conscious sense. So the detection of some significant stimulus in an image can
trigger all of that and then it feeds back to the brain which then affects the perception
and it becomes a feed forward circle.
So I suppose my question then would be in the case of Bob Walk and using the word case
after five years five plus years of institutions after having his voice there's a description
of his voice having been affected by all the screening that he did when he was institutionalized
it was kind of broken by it. Can, from a neuroscientific point of view could Bob Walk have how would
his reaction to the image have been changed having gone through that dark night of the
soul as it were and having learned or taught himself and been taught to see these images
over and over again for 40 years physiologically is there something that has changed or could
he have changed could he have cultivated a particular reaction is unique is he exemplary
well every experience changes your brain and the book is sitting here talking changes
your brain and the more profound the experience the more change there's going to be. So being
in a prison and screaming and being in an awful or any kind of awful situation is going
to change all of the systems in the brain because they're all responding and part of
this activity. So yeah I mean he's going to change his result of that and the way he
deals with the world after that will change as well. I don't know if that answered your
question but.
Which brings up plasticity.
Yeah which you have something to say about I know but so that in other words what we're
talking about are dynamic systems which does really relate to Volvo very in a profound
way I think both methodologically and you know how we can know what we know he's always
in motion. Yes.
Right it's never I mean this is what I'm Jo who was here anyway. Jo Jo was saying that
there's a kind of a day in flute you know to use the bin spong in the work itself which
can be maddening when you're reading it but is very very interesting from an intellectual
point of view that it can't be pinned down and so the idea of dynamism is implicit and
explicit in his work might in fact in his latter years he starts to use the word dynamo
ground yes yes as a replacement term for the pathos formula yeah yeah more or less yeah
and so again pushing on this of course every individual every experience has shaped the
way we see the world but I'm wondering.
The world's conscious strategies the build out list dynamo ground pathos formulas that
they they seem from a certain point of view to almost be not defense mechanisms but coping
mechanisms by which he is able to still look at those images that right cause him such
terror and uses the word terror fear over and over and over and over and so it's not
either or just to bring up here to guardian it's not either or it's some kind of swimming
and motion between these two poles that he you know he keeps thinking and it is a kind
of mind body polarity you know and unlike the rest of I kept thinking of the spatial
metaphor unlike the rest of western culture where it's mind over body the hierarchy.
In Valbo it seems to be the spatial metaphors like this and it's a continuum between the
two.
But you know you mentioned the plasticity and yeah I mean obviously every experience
changes the brain through the mechanisms of plasticity but maybe Christina you can say
something about the dynamics of memory and of the traces I think maybe that could be
of interest to the group.
Yeah so mechanism of plasticity which is that we used to process and we very much used to
make memories and memories can be short lasting or long lasting so there is short term plasticity
and this mechanism can be actually studying out relatively in detail so we know some of
the underlying mechanisms of long term plasticity important for long term memories and how those
then when they are retrieved the memories can influence the present and the present
is going to be made of the present experience plus the retrieval of the memories.
So this I think is very important and relevant to think about how that can play and there
is less known or understood about memory retrieval which is the other process that we are all
interested in.
I want to make a correction here actually Joe is the one who rediscover reconciliation
and when I started to work on it.
Carrying neither in your lab or in this conversation and those are processes that are very interesting
to think about also in the context of how we feel and how these changes over time so not
only this mechanism of plasticity which the brain changes and make long term changes to
store the memories but these changes are not static they keep changing they are very dynamic.
Which is related to Nacht-Triglickeit we can say to Freud's idea of what straight sheet
translated as deferred action which is not a good translation but afterliness which is
dynamic and not static.
So Christian maybe the coping that he is talking about is it comes to reconciliation where
the meaning is changed with each experience and maybe having the demonic and the ecstatic
together re-consolidates the memory in a slightly different way which then allows the next
experience to be less demonic.
I love this idea of re-consolidation or some people have described it as Boboek's
combinatory art which almost is based on a medieval combinatory art that he can take
the heterogeneous copia and find a way to constellate it in such a way in a manner that is both
instructive to others satisfying to him and ultimately a form of memory work.
And that's...
So just to be a little more precise about how it works, re-consolidation is when memories
are retrieved and they become fragile and changeable and this is a temporal window during which
changes can happen and then the memory becomes again less changeable.
However over time because there are many inputs coming in, many new experiences, many
re-elaboration, the overall trace is very very dynamic.
But there are specific processes and temporal window during which there is a much more power
and possibility and ability to make changes.
So modulating obviously the state, the emotional state is one of those that happens to you.
I mean this idea that the mechanisms of plasticity allow the traces to be inscribed in the neuronal
circuits but that that's something that would seem like permanent.
But actually that's not the case.
I think this is why I thought it was important to discuss.
They can be re-mobilized and re-associated with others in different contexts.
So it's a really dynamic of these traces.
It's very important and it's being studied by Christina, Joe and others.
And this is a heuristic...
You're speaking to the heuristic quality of Bob Olg's late work.
He's constantly using these methods, whether in lecture or with sequences of images, to
discover and bring people along with him.
And people describe his four hour lecture in famous lecture in Rome, the Hitziana lecture
in early January 1929 as a heuristic experience by which Bob Olg takes his viewers, and I
say viewers, maybe that's a slip there, because he had 19 panels along the lecture room.
And no one could see them.
No one could see them.
But yet people described the being in the lecture as this marvelous revelatory experience.
And Bob Olg himself at one point in the lecture says, yes, this speaks of it in terms of phenomenology
by which he mediates between the legacy of the phobic legacy on the one hand and the
ability to engage the world.
So let's take the images and then the historical images and then let's re-experience them.
And he brings his audience along with him.
Well, and also I think it's important to this, the idea of a dynamic changing concept, which
I think has attracted so many contemporary thinkers and scholars to Bob Olg, is the idea
that you could move the images, right?
I mean that they were on a kind of black felt and then you could shift the arrangement,
which is very similar to what happens in memory.
I myself have noticed in my autobiographical memories, explicit memories, that I have
actually changed the location.
So I have a strong memory, emotional memory, of being embarrassed by laughing adults when
I was four.
And I always remembered it in my aunt's house.
Well, it was remembered.
It did happen, I believe, in my aunt's house.
But because I couldn't remember the early house, I shifted the memory to the later location
which I had memorized.
This is an extremely interesting example, I think.
First of all, that we need to pin our memories to location, which is a very ancient idea
and medieval idea, to low side.
Greek, yes, but the Greek was topos, topos, and then Cicero.
Seminities is the story.
And then it's Cicero who really codified this, who tells the story of Simonides.
And that idea of topos, I think, is completely valid in these discussions of reconciliation.
In this sense, I actually would say that our memories are very inefficient, our memory
systems, or at least these type of memories, the memories that are declarative.
Shakeful.
Very shaky because we don't need really to remember all the details.
Actually, if we think about how many days we learn every single day, we lose them all.
What remains is an essential, very faint trace of something.
And then that something, especially if it's an old memory, has to be placed somewhere.
So then we make the connections, and this is how the false parts of the memories are
formed.
I think imagination and memory, as Vico said, these are two functions of the same faculty.
And if you look at hippocampal lesions in the brain, people who can't remember very well
also can't imagine very well.
So that Buckner Carroll paper about the perspective brain that maybe it's not about accurate memories
of our past, but using that material to predict future events.
Exactly.
Right.
So it's a forward-looking kind of function, and I think that's useful.
And all of this actually is not very unvalvogian, except he was looking more past.
He was a retrospective gamer.
He was a retrospective looker.
But he was fascinated by memory palaces.
Yes.
And he describes the atlas at certain points as a kind of neo-memory palace that would
help salvage or retain those details that are lost.
Without insisting on the details themselves, but just by making them present.
Because there was no verbal thickening around them as it stands.
Well, did.
Where are we in our drama?
Do you have a question?
How should we do?
Yeah, I think so.
Don't you think?
Yeah, you mentioned that it's not normal in your life.
Just for this.
I'm doing this right.
I can speak a lot.
So two possible next sees for your discussion about memory and reconsolidation.
One is about the nature of emotions research, which would be a nexus between neurobiology
and the other stuff that we all do.
I'm thinking of Paul Ekman's work on emotions.
And of how you have rapid reaction about a quarter second before you become conscious
or show your emotional expression on your face and his work on gesture.
And the second possible nexus, I thought of Bob Pinus's work on trauma when you were
giving your specific memory about space.
And Bob points out how he has a developmental model of trauma, which I think fits with what
you were talking about, of reconsolidation.
And there's entry points where one can change for better or for worse, the nature of memory
of trauma.
But also in terms of spatial location, Bob points out how a child, for instance, in a
sniping episode in LA remembers the sniping episode, remembers details of the soldiers'
boots, and misremembers his location next to his buddy, who was shot.
As a way of protecting himself, it's different from your explanation, protecting himself from
the memory of how close he came to death.
But my memory wasn't traumatic.
It was emotional, but it wasn't traumatic.
I think traumatic memory has a very specific kind of, and it can be hyper-detailed.
I mean, I have a traumatic memory of being in a car accident, which was followed by flashbacks.
And that's similar in the sense that I have avoided the actual impact.
Everything else is hyper-clear.
But the impact is missing.
The research on that suggests that it's very clear, but not necessarily accurate.
So you have very vid-specific-
Absolutely.
Absolutely.
I'm not claiming that it's what I'm remembering is how it happened, because actually I have
black and white memory.
I mean, I think what the data show is that the main focus is remembered, and then the
periphery of the memory is where all the mistakes come in.
Yeah, yeah, for sure.
Two things you said, Siri, sparked thoughts that I would love to just make two quick observations
and throw it back to you.
Speaking of murderous cannibalism, A.B. Warburg became a vegetarian during his hospitalization
because of a very concrete, specific fear that he was being served the cooked flesh
of his own family members.
He had these persistent fears of drinking blood, not just the Jews' blood, but his own family
members.
He had visions, and he accused his doctor of in a very eerily prescient way, shipping
train cars packed with the flesh of Jews.
This is 1921.
So I'm asking a question for which I don't have an answer about his own ambivalence or
even fear of his own aggression and his desire to not devour his relatives or their own
the Jews.
The other spark from something you said when you talked about him and his endless flight,
his endless motion and how he couldn't be pinned down while he was hospitalized, a doctor's
note in his chart, and this is obviously translated, said, he practices a cult with the moths and
butterflies that fly into his room at night.
He speaks to them for hours.
He calls them his little soul animals, Celin Tarkin, and tells them about his suffering
and then direct quote from his notes, it's hard to know is this experience or fantasy
or a dream or what it is.
The most beautiful butterfly I have ever pinned down suddenly bursts through the glass and
dances mockingly upwards into the blue air.
Now I should catch it again, but I am not equipped for this kind of locomotion or to
be exact I should like to, but my intellectual training does not permit me to do so.
I should like at the approach of our light-footed girl joyfully to whirl away with her, but
such soaring movements are not for me.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's in the letter to Jolas, isn't it?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Jolas.
Yeah.
I think it's mostly like an elliptic.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Francois.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
I have a very nice question because here you are too from literature and free from neurosciences.
And Kessina is also a psychoanalyst and neuroscientist.
And I was asking me finally after this roundtable, what is a dynamic memory?
Because we are looking in a new way, a dynamic memory.
And you were speaking about verbal unconscious, new kind of unconsciousness.
This gets me afternoon.
Frigant unconscious, cognitive unconsciousness, now verbal unconscious.
And after the discussion about dynamic memory, reconciliation, retrieval, transformation,
I thought it was possible to introduce a new concept.
It is reconciliation in culture because you have the incidence also of culture through
the process of reconciliation, rebuilding, transforming the memories through not only
the individual history of each one, but also through the impact of the culture in the inside
world.
And I don't know if you can take this new view of thinking, reconciliation, also in
confrontation of the question of culture.
No, I think this is really important because I think it relates again to the dankham, to
reflective self-consciousness, if you will, to Kierkegaard's reflection to all of this,
that space where you have, necessarily, you have culture.
So if we think about human beings as socio-psycho-biological beings with those hyphens in some way blurred,
I know this is not good in science, but I can do this.
And that if we think about that, then we understand that these things are completely mingling
together because, of course, culture, everything we read, everything we see becomes part of
our, you know, psycho-biological reality.
Yes.
Because we have one part, plasticity means all is conserved, and for the other part,
plasticity all is susceptible to change.
And if you have this double view, for example, the snake, and it is the conservation of something
through memory, we don't know where, it's very difficult, Liam James, hypothesis, and
so on.
And we have also the idea of diachronic reorganization, permanent reorganization, each experience,
every experience modifies, we never use the same brain and so on.
And here in that, it's difficult to think these two contradictory dimensions.
It's all the same thing, so the snake is there, and so the place where you're bit by the
snake becomes stored as part of the, you know, becomes plastic and stored as a new memory.
And then the people you were with, or if you go back to that place, the people you're
with at that time become part of that memory.
And that's why I've argued that metaphor is precisely the way we need to read this dynamic
cultural space because it's able to keep contradictory things together at once.
But Christopher, absolutely right, that metaphor is probably the beautiful motion here of all
the possibilities of changing meanings.
Yes, yes.
Right, so that, and that can also be a form of dank realm between the two poles of metaphorical
thinking.
Sorry.
Thank you.
Thank you. I have a comment trying to link the two round tables and trying to go from
the notion of detail that was very much stressed in the previous round table to the notion
of this collective memory that on the contrary is at the center of some of your discussions.
I will attention to the peripheral element, the particular, I would say, micro logical
attitude.
It is true that it's something that, of course, is typical of Warburg, but of many other authors,
not only art historians in the 20th century.
I was thinking of Benjamin, of course.
But Georgia yesterday mentioned Giovanni Morelli as even Leer Molliev, so important as we know
to Freud.
We shouldn't be very cautious here because I think that detail is crucial, but at the
same time we should distinguish two very different approaches, micro logical approaches, because
as George already said, in Morelli you have the analysis, the exploration of the single
detail, Botticelli's nail, Filipino DIP is ear, but what is the task?
The task is that you have to identify the responsible of the image, the individual, the
artist responsible, the attribution.
So detail here is used as I would say, Prince Chippium in the individual, the individual.
On the contrary, if you read the conclusion of the Botticelli's essay by Barbara, there
it comes out very clearly that he is not at all interested in Botticelli as an individual.
The detail is used there in order to see he uses Caliusti, in, of course, Aristotle's
categories, the notion of delta rauzi, the second substance, because he says the detail
evokes in Botticelli something that is not only Botticelli, something that Botticelli
shares with the past, with a common ground, with other painters, and so it's rather the
common ground, the co-innae iced this, the common sense shared.
And so I come to the second round table, what is this common ground shared?
It is not the collective unconscious, I have difficulties as well in thinking of this notion,
but here, hearing Zehmon, it is inherited cerebral substance, which is a very difficult,
as difficult perhaps as the collective unconscious to understand, but it is substance inherited
from centuries, through centuries, and if something can come up again in the Renaissance,
it is because Donatello or Botticelli inherit materials, so it's anti-Bergsonian, it's
not memory or matter, but it's memory is matter, and it's something shared, so I would call
it Brinchipium David was the only, because it hints at something that is shared among
a group of a community through centuries or thousands of years.
Yeah, we just don't know how that works.
I will only quickly add that it is true that Barbara is not Jung as we know very well.
It is also true, as we spoke, that's now the pair that Jung says, my notion of collective
unconscious is Zehmon's name, and my idea of archetype is Borquertz War built.
We know that Borquertz and Zehmon are two very important sources in Barbara, and perhaps
we have a good idea to finally discuss how from Zehmon and Borquertz, common and shared
sources to different perspectives on the idea of the over builder and the collective
memory can be articulated.
Well, it's true, but it may be, you know, we talked a little bit last night because I
started reading this guy Zehmon really because I found him in Valblud, and it's very interesting.
But when you return to Valblud after having read Zehmon, you realize that it's not Zehmon
anymore.
I don't know what your impression is because you're probably closer to this, but I just
thought, oh, so it's not like Jung.
It's denatured.
The time you get back to it, it's not Zehmon anymore.
It's a kind of, again, I think a dynamic principle that just keeps running through, which escapes
at least me as a reader.
I can't literally pin it down.
I can't do the butterfly.
But the dynamism isn't with Valblud rethinking Zehmon throughout his life.
No.
As a rather static view of Zehmon, rather it is the dynamism of this synchronic immediate
presence that he feels with at Gilandayo, for instance.
Yes, I agree with it.
There's this kind of synchronicity between himself and the artist that he studies because,
in part, they're heroically, Valblud's words, struggling with this energy that he is struggling
with as well.
And that's remarkable.
It's very stimulating.
So I have many questions.
Two questions for Chris and Siri, and one question for Christina, Joe, and Pierre.
The first question is, stemming from my ignorance, you talk a lot about collective and conscious
Jung.
So what about if any, well, not you, but we discuss Jung a lot?
What if any relationship between Wundt and Barbara Wundt was almost never mentioned this
more?
The second question, particularly for Siri, the relationship between creativity was not
so much addressed so far.
So the relationship between mania or hypomania and creativity.
And for the neuroscientists, we have a dream team here about memory.
So something that really is puzzling me.
The brain is about 2% of body weight, but it gets about 15% of the heart output.
25.
25 or more than 20% of more than 20.
Based on consumption of oxygen.
So it costs a lot of energy.
Episodic memory.
It turns out I attended a lecture by Jerry Torb recently about music.
So when you are a kid, you listen every day to the Beatles.
Then you stop.
You decide to shift to a different musical taste.
You listen to, I don't know, shoots or some Baroque music.
Then all of a sudden you listen to as little as 30 millisecond of a song.
You used to listen a lot, but in the last 30 years you never listened to.
It hasn't to be helped because it's very easy.
But any song you listen continuously can be recognized immediately.
Or at least that's what I learned.
So if you can confirm that, what is your opinion about the neurophysiological mechanism?
Enabling this trace to be sleeping for 30 years if it's a trace at all.
And then boom, to be recovered.
And how much affect has to do with this?
Thank you.
Well, there's the first one.
I'm just going to say something briefly about hypomania and creativity.
First of all, I really think that there is a connection, deep connection between the nervous
system, motor sensory roots to imaginative acts.
I can tell you just personally that for me when I'm writing, the rhythms are extremely
important.
And I can feel when a rhythm is wrong and I correct it.
And those rhythms and what I like to call emotional truth, which is why one story and
not another in my case, I mean this is a good question.
A fiction writer can write anything.
I can write about flying zebras if I want to.
And no one will say I can't do it.
There's no truth truth with a capital T. What there is are emotional truths that are expressed
through the stories and a great deal of that is unconscious.
And it's connected to motor sensory aspects.
I think all creativity is alike.
I don't care what fields you're in.
And I always pull out this brilliant quote from Einstein who was asked by Jacques Hadamah
how he worked.
And he said, none of my work has anything to do with signs, either mathematical or linguistic.
The way I work is visual, muscular and emotional.
And later it's translated into symbols.
This for me is simply an experience that resonates with my own experience.
And so I think that the roots of creativity and vlog, I think at least certainly implicitly
is talking about that.
The question of subject and object where there's no difference, this kind of deep bodily experience
where there's really no reflection which then becomes a form of reflection, say, in the
act of making symbols, whether they are, I think they're different.
Linguistic signs are different from images, but nevertheless they're all a form of creating
that distance.
There's an aesthetic barrier that's protective.
Yes, and we haven't really, speaking to the question of creativity, we haven't really
spoken about Vavwog's unpublished writings, especially in his late years, which are, he
calls them a laboratory, he uses this metaphor again and again, for his discoveries, for
his numerous unfinished, unfinishable projects.
The way that he moves from one idea to another and condenses, fadictates his language in
a playful way, is extraordinary as he tries to discover new projects and new connections
that he hadn't previously contemplated, even as he returns to his old ideas.
So, if you read the diary, the toggle book in the last three years, the palpable enthusiasm,
the inspiration that he feels with the new Bruno project is like a little kid.
And it's as if he's persuaded himself that he's been able to remake himself.
So, for instance, he says at one point, Bruno, with whom I've been engaged with for 40 years,
and there's no evidence whatsoever that this is anything but a new project.
Just suggest the degree to which he feels it.
Yes, yes.
It's a sibling.
Yes.
That's it.
Okay.
Oh, good.
Someone, Christina, maybe you'll talk about one star.
Some answer or some talks, some comment about the question of how these memories can last
for such a long time and be retrieved later.
That is one of the outstanding questions to be addressed in neuroscience.
There are a number of suggestive results.
Launter memories rely on biological changes, that's a fact.
So, what type of biological changes can maintain these information for more than 30 years?
And they are recalled in a fraction of a second or, you know, a very short time they can return.
So, you know, study all these mechanisms in the last 20 years, we know that the making
of proteins, what's called gene expression that is required for long term memory and the
transition of proteins, because proteins have a much shorter life.
They can not last for more than 30 years.
But there are mechanisms that regulates those making of the proteins.
One that was mentioned is, you know, chromatin changes, epigenetics.
And those can really last for a long time.
I would add to that that another possibility that is still not explored is feedback mechanisms.
They can actually maintain a process for a very long time.
One that has been very much discussed is actually the network of synapses, the contacts among
neurocells, including astrocytes, I would think.
And maybe the network is what is able to maintain over time the information.
So they can be changes because of this plasticity.
You can make no association, take out others, modulate the intensity and so on.
And there is a substrate, a combination of synapses that is maintained and when triggered
the memory returns.
And I live to draw the emotional part very important.
I think the music part is, you know, it's interesting that music does have the special
way of kind of getting to the sweet spot of emotion and memory in the way that nothing
else can.
But I would maintain that the musical memories that do that most are the ones from your adolescence.
And the reason for that is because, this is a total speculation, but because of the hormonal
upheaval and changes that are taking place at that time, consolidate those memories especially
strongly so that when you hear that fragment of the introduction to help or some other
song, it's because it happened at a time when your emotional life was just really starting
to happen in a profound way.
Just a comment on the energy utilization.
I mean, this idea that maintaining memories is an active process may be also reflected
in this very high cost for energetic cost of the brain, which is really ten times as
well.
What's puzzling is why the brain should invest energy to keep in memory something the brain
will never know if it will happen unless there's some very strong emotion of the evening.
But I mean, absolutely.
I mean, long-term memories are always connected to emotion.
Unless there is another way of making long-term memories, which is true repetition, those are
other types of memories.
And who knows, maybe also repressing memories cost energy.
Thank you.
It occurs to me that hearing what we've heard last couple of days and particularly at this
session that what VARBORD needs most is what Freud received.
I want to say 25 or 30 years ago, a book by Frank Soloway, Freud, The Biology of the
Mind.
We need, it seems like, and I think Andrea mentioned that, you know, VARBORD went to
study medicine after his military service.
I don't think we fully appreciate the magnitude, particularly in some of the suggested passages
that Spiro has mentioned about VARBORD's reading of Darwin and that his belief that
perception involved a kind of energetic transfer, a creation of a symbol that is the stimulus
generated a response which became kind of the biological substrate for an internal image.
But I believe Professor Rose talks about it very persuasively and that it's the expression
of these biological images in pathos formula, schlock, build-up and what have you.
This is the stuff I think that VARBORD deserves.
He deserves the serious kind of treatment as a the first affective neuroscientist.
He, you know, and this business of this collective unconscious may not be as effective as what
Timothy Wilson talks about as in a, the, I think he calls it the adaptive unconscious.
And so this adaptivity, I think, is one of the things that VARBORD was constantly aware
of and why you could have these recurrences, this knock-labin is because the biological
substrate remains the same through time and the, you know, the stimuli change but the substrate
remains.
Any thoughts on that adaptive and solway connection?
I would just say you make a very compelling case.
And I just want to address this idea of the mainia and creativity.
I think Freud was right when he said a mild state of depression is for him the best state
of creativity and that's because in a depressive position to go to Winnicott you bring the
projections back home, take responsibility and it's not all enemies out there, it's
inside.
Yeah, but hypomania does not have to be that.
I mean if you look at, you know, certain manic patients and the energy that's, that's produced
or even if you look at certain hypergraphic conditions that accompany temporal lobe epilepsy,
I'm, for example, Dostevsky, Dostevsky was clearly hypergraphic.
He had temporal lobe epilepsy and what he produced in those moments of I would, you can certainly
call it hypomania, we're, you know, brilliant works of art.
I mean the content is not determined by his hypomania.
But I think it can go both ways that depressive positions can produce great art but so can
hypomanic positions.
Anybody has a comment to the gentleman's question regarding adaptation?
Oh yeah.
If not, then we will stop and we will regather here at two o'clock.
That'd be a wrap up with about an hour and hour, 15 minutes where all the participants
would be, is it two o'clock?
Yeah, two o'clock.
So we finish by about three-third, did the latest.
Right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Let's go.
Let's go.
Okay.
Well, sure.
Great for you to come.
I do?
Yeah.
I, I, I was in immense power.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
