 I'm Ed Nurse-Escion, director of the Helix Center. I want to welcome you all to these two days of roundtables focusing around the ideas of Abby Warburg. I would like to say primarily that I want to thank all of you who are here. I realize it's an early morning time. We are usually not here at this hour. I thank all the participants who come from various places in the world to be part of this meeting. From our side, I think Rob Penzer has done a tremendous amount of work to organize this and I'd like to thank him. And I would like also to thank Konstwakwie Bejie, who is here from London and who is director of the Abby Warburg Institute in London. The beautiful poster that you see out there and the brochure that you have here were all designed by him and sent to us from London. So I'd like to thank him. We are very honored today here to have the ambassador, Francois Bava from Switzerland and I'm going to ask him to say a couple of words. Yeah, Ed. Ladies and gentlemen, it's a pleasure for me to be here and to have Switzerland associated to your symposium. You may ask why Switzerland is associated? Well, you know the relationship between Warburg and Switzerland, K and is supported by another foundation called the Will's Dog Foundation which owns the Rolex Watch Company. So it's really rooted in Geneva and as an important, I would say, an important support. The mission of the Agalma Foundation is to explore the relationship between neuroscience, psychoanalysis and art. And the two persons in charge of the foundation are here today, Pierre Magistreti and Francois and Francois Auncereme. And the idea of this symposium, if I understand well, is born or was born from a conversation between Professor Galese from Parma, Pierre and Francois in a train between Geneva and Lausanne. So, they were talking about Warburg and about his concept of science without name which basically tries to bring together various disciplines and anthropology, history of art and biology. And the objective of the Agalma Foundation is also to build bridges between the sciences and art and humanities. So they said, that's interesting. Warburg as a resonance for us means something for us. So let's try to do something and then they spoke to the endocision and today we are here. So that's the link to Switzerland. I wish you a very successful conference and have a good day. Thank you. Hello, Professor Magistreti from the Agalma Foundation. A very brief introduction now. Actually Ambassador Barras, you can see how professional our ambassadors because he told everything I asked to tell. He really made his homework and said everything I wanted to say about the Agalma Foundation. So thank you, Francois, thank you Ambassador Barras. Anyway, as president of the Agalma Foundation, it gives me great pleasure to welcome you all here. It's true that we actually had the idea of this symposium, Victoria Francois and myself. And even after, I should say, there was some facilitating substances like wine. We actually had quite some wine and then suddenly we had this idea of organizing something here. And more seriously, again, as mentioned very clearly by Ambassador Barras, the Agalma Foundation as its mission to try to bridge neuro-science, psychoanalysis, culture and society. And in these days, I think, of super-specialization and where academic life has lost a little bit of its freedom, I think. I can say this after having been in academic life for 30 years. It's really very refreshing and very important that there are places like the Agalma Foundation and I think the Helix Foundation where there is a freedom of thinking, a freedom of making connection, thinking outside the box and trying to move fields forward, not necessarily in a very disciplinary way. And this is really the goal of the foundation. In terms of activities, the foundation organizes discussions, I should say, between a guest that Francois and I invite. And then we speak for about 45 minutes. I have to say we were very much influenced by what Ed launched many years ago with the Philocht etes foundation, again, very free discussion on not necessarily even on a specific topic, but just in our case, what we try to do is what we say an experiment with someone outside neuroscience and psychoanalysis and see how he or she, particularly from the case of the art and culture, how we can have some ideas emerge from this kind of strange mix between neuroscience, psychoanalysis and someone from the cultural world. And these discussions are filmed, again, very much inspired by what Ed has launched and then they are on YouTube. So if you go on the Agalma website, you can see we have now about, I think, over 20 of such discussions and you may find them interesting. Some of them are in English, I have to say most of them are in French, but then other activities of the foundations are to organize occasionally small workshops like this one. We just did one last week in Geneva for the 100th anniversary of the death of Férino de Socio, the linguistic from Geneva. It turns out just out of curiosity you may be interested that a member of the Agalma of the board of the Agalma Foundation is a Christian de Socio, a descendant of Férino de Socio, so that was even more appropriate for us to discuss this. And we had, again, a little bit in a smaller scale, but the same idea, neuroscientist, psychoanalysis, linguist, philosophers, I think quite productive and we will have actually a small publication come out of this workshop. And then we tried to sponsor certain research efforts which, for those of you who have tried to engage in experimental approaches, bringing together psychoanalysis and neuroscience, it's quite difficult without kind of denaturing both of them. So it's a really very difficult exercise, but we think it's a worthwhile exercise. So we have some fellows who work on this topic. Actually, we have with Christina Berrini, who is quite unique because she's a prominent neuroscientist and also a psychoanalyst here at NYU. And so we have a project with her and we have a couple of other projects at the Federal Institute of Technology where I work. So this is to give you the context and the interests of the Agalma Foundation and it looks like I've been looking at the program and I would like to thank Ed, of course, and all the people who contributed to organizing and bringing together the people. We have now an experiment that will go on in the style we like at the Agalma Foundation and I think also at the Helix Foundation. So thank you very much and I hope we have a very productive two days. Thank you Pierre. I didn't say anything about Helix. I assume everybody knows about Helix, but if you don't, I'd be happy to talk to you after the meeting. So what I'm going to do is introduce the participants in this round table in the briefest way possible and then we'll get going. I will start with Ludovica Loomer who is sitting there and she's a philosopher and a neurobiologist and has worked with Samir Zeki who is one of the founders, I guess, of the Neuroesthetics movement in London. Next to her is Vittorio Galese who is professor of physiology in the Department of Neuroscience of the University of Palma and well known for his discovery of the mirror neurons. Sitting there is Anjan Chatterjee who is a neurologist and member of the Center for Cognitive Neuroscience and the Center for Neuroscience and Society at the University of Pennsylvania and I believe he has a book coming out on neuroesthetics or it's already here. I don't know but it's certainly coming out this week. David Friedberg who has participated in a number of our round tables in the past is professor of Art History at the University of Columbia and director of the Italian Academy for Advanced Studies in America. And finally Andrea Pinotti teaches aesthetics at the University de l'estud de di Milano and is director of the program at the College International de Philosophy in Paris on the project Monumont, nonumont, correct? Okay, so we'll get going. To get this round table started I asked Vittorio to just say very, very brief words, a few words to get oriented on the subject and then everybody else would jump in. Thank you. Thank you Ed. It's a great pleasure to be here particularly because that dream that was conceived in Switzerland between Genève and Luzon is now real. I mean we are here. We will spend two days discussing this amazing figure of Abi Warburg. I think we begin to appreciate how innovative this approach was, perhaps particularly today. When we are experiencing a new form of dialogue between disciplines that the first site may look as remote as possible like the study of the brain, the study of art, of culture. When Vittorio embodies I think in a marvelous way this curiosity and this attempt to bridge different field of expertise particularly because cognitive neuroscience is very popular. Every day we read the big headlines in the newspaper, we discover what romantic love is all about, we discover a tiny little area where beauty sits and the like. This I would say, outrageously excessive form of reductionism needs to be tempered by an open dialogue with people that because of the background tend to look at the individual in a more holistic way. So we must bring back the brain to where it belongs to the body in the first place but this brain body complex it makes sense to study it to the extent that even if we move from a methodological reductionist approach so we are dealing with the nuts and bolts so to speak of what it means to be human the ultimate goal must be to go back to the holistic view of human nature and if we want to do that we cannot live out from our investigation, artistic expression, creativity and how this relates to something which is hidden in our psychology. So I think that the chicanelises, neuroscience, the humanities broadly speaking now finally are in a position to collaborate to this very exciting enterprise of shedding light on who we are exploiting also this new level of description that cognitive neuroscience and I think a prominent figure to bless so to speak this enterprise I couldn't imagine a better figure than Abhi Babu. So as I was thinking about today's meeting I thought I didn't think of myself as a neuro esthetician I think of myself as an art historian who makes use of tools that seem to me that will illuminate the objects of our studies and as many of you know I have long insisted on the importance of opening one's mind to science and not getting too anxious about the alleged reductivism of science but as I was thinking about today's symposium I realised that probably once one was a child and suddenly one is old and probably I may have been in this audience the first person to have gone to the Warburg Institute. So I wondered when I could just begin with a little background. So I arrived in Oxford to do my graduate work in art history at the end of 1969 and Francis Haskell who had just taken over from another great and extraordinary hermeneute and art historian Edgar Vinte who was a Warburgian of course was a high British positivist and he looked at me and he said you can't study here go to the Warburg Institute in London. So I went to the Warburg Institute so that was at the end of 1969 and as I was reflecting on the direction of Warburg in studies and the ways in which many of us here including myself and Vittorio have sort of seen the links between A.B. Varbog and neuroscience I realised that it wasn't always so because when I got to the Warburg Institute the emphasis was completely on both Michael Baxondall and Anne Sconbrick were completely on the Naheleb and Der Antica. Gombrick had done his own stuff on perception as we all know in art and delusion but the real Warburgian work at that time and throughout the 1970s and even into the 1980s was really about iconography and the Naheleb and Der Antica. So when I wrote the power of images sort of thinking about the other aspect of A.B. Varbog which has now come to the fore in other words this kind of psychological roots of human responses to images embodied above all in the whole notion of the pathos formula the patos formula. In other words those aspects of art which move us because of the collocation of emotion and movement in the body and its effects on the bodies of others which of course tied up eventually with the work of the Mira Neuron group in Parma. This was really a very late cumber on the Naheleb and of Varbog himself in London. No one would have thought that the cognitive neuroscience offered any access to the works of A.B. Varbog. So actually this is all a late development. And it was always there in Varbog the notion of the emotional consequences of moving drapery and dancing bodies and so on. But nobody until fairly recently, I mean we have lots of people here, Chris Wood has written eloquently about it, Chris Johnson also. But for a long time the original conception, the rarely original aspect of Warburg's contribution was relegated to this more positivist decoding of the great iconographies of the Renaissance. So now we have reclaimed what seems to be the most moving aspect as it were of A.B. Varbog and its finding its fruition in the kinds of work which we have seen done amongst the cognitive neuroscience and with the development of the neuroscience of emotion movement and so on. So I think we have a lot of people who are going to be able to move ahead in this direction. But I just thought that that historical background would be useful. Adding perhaps another issue to this question of the historical background more generally as regards German culture in the 19th century. Victoria, you told us about this figure, a special figure of Varbog as a possible bridge between natural sciences and humanities. We know that the German philosophical and epistemological discourse was responsible for the division, the terminus technique was between Geistes Wiesenshaften on one side and Mathur Wiesenshaften on the other side. For the rest it was not unfrequent that students and scholars training in one field took courses in the other. Varbog himself is an example, an emblematic example because he was trained as an art historian but in the 90s he went to Berlin to attend courses in medicine, at the Faculty of Medicine. There is studied neurology and you find in the fragments on the psychology of expression very interesting sketches and drawings on the structure of the nerves, on the problem of the reflex and there are drawings about the relationship between stimulus and response. And then he read neurologists like Evelle Herring and the very important lecture in 1870 on memory as organized matter and then among his sources there was Richard Zehmon, a zoologist and neurologist as well who gave him the terminus technique was Mime N. Graham. So he was really imbued with this literature and I think that just taking one of the most famous concepts in Varbog's discourse, Sophros Zune, the ancient Greek world that it translates with based on and height. I'm not sure what an English possible translation would be, caution, prudence, being wise, not being impulsive. There you find this idea of distance as interval, pose as crucial. It was not only a question of symbolic distance. The one that he discusses, for example, in the certain ritual lecture that modern technology destroys the distance that magic and art had instituted between man and world. It speaks also of distance in a neurological way, meaning the distance between the stimulus, the response and the human being has the creature that can procrastinate, that can introduce mediation, a postponement, a creature that is not obliged to immediately respond to the stimulus but that can respond and Zehmon was very important to him in this context in a procrastinated way, in a delayed way. Image plays in this frame, I think, a very fundamental role because image has a biological meaning in this biological utility in helping men in negotiating between stimulus and response, corresponding the response, even for centuries, even for thousands of years. And so this idea was thistchen round, bank round, the space in between, the space for thought, the space for memory and that's around, all terms that Warburg evokes as a constellation around the Sophros unit term. I think they can also be usefully investigated from a neurological perspective, rooted in those young years of studies in Berlin. I wonder if I could pose a question as I've been listening to this, that I'm still trying to get my head around. Which is on the one hand, there are cultural theories of which I am relatively ignorant of and on the other hand, there is psychoanalysis of which I am relatively ignorant and a sconst in between. Is that like a double negative? And then there's neuroscience of which I have some knowledge and in part, I'm trying to figure out what the relationships of these things are. And on the one hand, you can think of cultural theories as something that is an emergent property of a whole lot of things but can't be reduced to what one individual person or what one individual brain is doing. And at the other end, at least my medical school knowledge of psychoanalysis is a deep dive into the individual at the level of the content of what they're talking about, what they're thinking about, what they're dreaming about, what they associate, so on and so forth. But neuroscience in some way seems to be somewhere in between, at least the way it's typically practiced which is on the one hand, our methods are driven to try to generalize, it's the inherent nature of much of empirical research is you want to get generalizable principles but not typically so generalizable that they are applicable to cultural theories. And the very inherent nature of generalizing is that we typically tend to be less interested in the individual. The individual becomes one exemplar of a general principle that we're trying to derive. And psychoanalysis on the one hand seems to be, seems to drill down at the individual and the content of the experience of the individual that we typically try to do away with in most neuroscience studies. But our generalization doesn't generalize to the point of having at least in a transparent way making contact with cultural notions. And I'm just curious what people think about, are these tensions that are inherent in the disciplines or are these just historical tensions that have to be traversed and settings like this might help in that regard? It's my turn to answer. Thank you very much. It's a small issue. Actually, one of the things that was fascinating, the most about Warburg, is that he's expressing, I'm not sure for the first time in the history of thought because we can always go back to the Greeks for almost everything, but exactly the tension between subjective and objective individuality and socially. I think one of the most striking things that make us what we are, this tension of being a self, but this self is developed and we reach our concept of being who we are in the interaction with the others. So this tension is exactly what makes us what we are. But I think at the beginning of the century, the end of the 1800, beginning of 1900, there was this crack somehow that opened a discussion that we are still trying to solve today even with the songs of yesterday of Jesus' life, this mind-body matter over mind and mind over matter. And this crack opened up a sort of view came from which came out the destroying of all our stability and certainty about our conscious life, about space and time, about the possibility of measurement. And everything came out at the same time. And even Warburg was there at the same time and was striking with the notion of magical and real and art, science, religion, because we don't talk about it, but it's still there is the big part of our life anyway. We were there to try to find a solution about this gap to give some uncorch which was done because otherwise we would collapse into this crack. And opening this volcano of things, we had to find sort of solution, we had to find our way through to build a bridge. And I think Warburg was amazing in trying to do that. Probably was not a solid, probably I'm not an expert on, I write quite a lot about what he wrote, but I'm not an expert on him. But it was one of the first to try maybe unconsciously to find a bridge to a world like this gap. And this was, most of our life is an individual experience. We lived with deep-seatering culture and culture is a big part of what we are, but we live in our individual life and experiences. And so he describes the experiences, for example, in front of a war of art as the most private thing is that the impact is there, is talking to you and you have to give life to the image you have in front. But then you have to insert in the history, in the culture, there is no history of culture without the history of an idea. So to make sense of this individual experience, you have to insert it in the development of something broader which is more or less the history of. We cannot even say the Western thought because it was linked to everything and everywhere. It destroyed completely space and time. The symbol could travel and live without barriers in every time and every space. And this tension between the private experience of something and the objective is exactly what art is about and what art came about when there was this huge brain. In the postmodernism, art became an idea more than an image. Duchamp was the master of that. I was putting us in front of a urinal saying, now you have to perceive it as a piece of art and until you don't perceive it as a piece of art, this is not going to be art. So you have to make this become something which can travel in history. I don't know, it's funny what you said because it's something that I'm struggling with trying to make sense of it, this tension between the aesthetic private experience and the history. I think Anyan raised a very important point about the relevance and the specific status of cognitive neuroscience when addressing these specific topics that traditionally as Andrea was reminding us of, belong to these separate domains, Natur, Visinshaft and Geistus Visashaft. I think it's time to seriously question this distinction and division. However, we should also bear in mind that when we speak of cognitive neuroscience, we basically describe a methodological approach. So we all recognize ourself as cognitive neuroscientists to the extent that we all have a daily practice with this very expensive choice, we call it the Marai, Hidens-D-E-G, Pet and the like, but you can use employ these toys to ask completely different kinds of questions. And it's true that to lay the grounding, the foundational basis of an approach to human nature based on this specific methodological approach, it is unavoidable to start with an approach that so to speak, a privilege generalizing results where we take the average undergraduate most of the time white first world college student to be a sort of typical example of the human species, so to speak. Not only reductive, but heavily biased view of human nature. Indeed, in the field of the study of emotions, people, there is a growing number of people also of colleagues that begin to question the supposed universality of some of the findings upon which the empirical study of emotion was based starting from the second half of last century. And interestingly, more and more of our colleagues are exactly thinking about how to study these distinctive aspects of human nature, which is the individual quality of being a human being. And it is remarkable that as soon as you decide to leave behind this approach to the supposed generality of the finding, you are up to trying to dig more about the distinctive relationship between how your brain works and what your personal life history was, your attachment style, the early experiences you had with your parents, with other individuals, all of a sudden you realize that you spot incredible differences. I'm thinking about a study where people were required to watch videos portraying the facial expression of their partner in pain. And it turns out that according to your personality profile, different brain networks activate in spite of the exactly the same cognitive response when you are asked to evaluate the unpleasantness and the intensity of the pain that supposedly your partner is feeling by merely watching to this video showing the facial expression of your partner. This cognitive evaluation is the same in all participants. However, when you look at which part of their brain is active, you discover that people with a different affective style activate the standard called the circuit for the empathy for pain, the anterior part of the insular and the anterior cingulate cortex, while other individuals don't. They tend to activate more the visual part of the brain, the mesial aspect of the brain, part of what we call the default mode network, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. So they most likely experience that particular image of their partner in pain in a completely different way, which can be partly also identified with our peculiar methodological reductionist approach. So I think there's a lot to do and this is why I think this time is really exciting for all of us because now that we learn how to use this machine, we are perfectly familiar with the instruction manuals, so to speak, we know what to expect from a technical point of view. We know the limitation of the technique, but at the same time we should perhaps think a lot more and someone said a long time ago that science doesn't think. I think it's way too extreme view, but when reading some neuroscientific papers sometimes I think Heidegger was right. So there's a lot of room to improve the realistic value of this particular approach that I repeat offers you a further perspective on human nature, which will never be able to give the final answer to the question that keep us busy all the time, who we are. But I think it can bring in new data, new perspective that if interestingly discussed with the contribution of scholars from other disciplines can lead us to very interesting results, I think. So I'm rather optimistic. I just wanted to say although Victoria and I have known each other for a long time, work together, I noticed a slight backsliding here. And I'm not sure that he's making slightly unnecessary concessions, but never mind. I think the point is that, and I'll explain in a moment, I think Anyan's question is a really important one. It's one which the people in the humanities, whom I work with, mostly ask all the time. I mean, the question is how can the generalizing aspects of science be reconciled with the status of the individual, the effects of cultures and contexts? So whenever I hear this question, I always inclined to say it's not a view which is well received, but I'm inclined to say what's so difficult to understand about the situation? I'll tell you why I think this. What I think has happened now as the sciences have come closer to the humanities, it's offered us an extraordinary opportunity. And that is the best neuroscientists that we just heard are attentive to context. There's no question about that. But how do we arrive at the understanding of the individual with all this generalization around us? And this is what I'm trying to say is not so difficult to understand. In order to grasp the effects of individual contexts of past histories, both personal and historical, we still need to know what happens in the brain of all individuals, possibly even primates. But neuroscience also gives us the tools. This has been the great privilege for me. It also gives the one the tools to understand better what happens when the human brain is modulated by the effects of individual cognitive experiences, individual inputs, individual circumstances. There is no, in my view, no distinction really between the task of the neuroscientists in establishing basic structures in the brain and figuring out how individuality is constituted on the basis of those, you know, we all have an amygdala. If the amygdala is lesion, you just walk straight into the traffic across the way. A amygdala is activated when you have a fear response. Now, obviously, some of us know snakes better than others. You know, her pathologists are probably less likely to be afraid of seeing a cobra, or be seeing a, when I see a snake, I jump away. I don't make any distinctions, any taxonomic distinctions between those that are poisonous. But when you see, as Joe did as shown, when you see something that moves a bit like a snake, everyone is going to have a startled reaction. And thereupon succeed, I mean, you know, the great beauty of the neuroscientists now, it also gives us a sense of temporal operations and temporal distinctions within the brain. So I think the prospect here for understanding the individual is not curiously diminished by the kinds of techniques which we have available, but in fact enhanced. And that's why the backsliding, I just want to briefly, I don't think you need backslide away. So we need slide away too far from basic emotions and so on and so forth. To be more outspoken, I'm really annoyed. Keeping reading articles where it seems that people are even unaware of the absurdity of translating the personal level description at the level of typically amenable to our approach. So I'm not reducing the impact of neuroscience, actually the opposite. I mean, I'm a neuroscientist. That's my job. I mean, I'm not an art historian. I'm happy to spend time with people like you, but my approach is completely different. What I meant to say is that there is not enough, people are not enough aware that our approach could be a lot more fruitful if we would abandon this kind of neuro hubris leading us to establish a one-to-one map between the words we employ to describe our inner life, our emotion, our experiences and brain networks. Because such a one-to-one map between words and neurons probably doesn't exist. So the methodological reductionism that became available by the possibility of investigating human nature with the tools of cognitive neuroscience is an invaluable tool enabling us to deconstruct such words. And for example, showing that many people got it right when they were saying that vision in a way is a sort of haptic experience. I'm thinking about Merlot-Ponti, for example. Now with our expensive toys, we can show that Merlot-Ponti was right because indeed all of our perception in a way is a synesthetic. So it is really becoming hard to find parts of the brain that are unimodal. Even primary sensory areas, it has been shown. The visual cortex can be driven by auditory stimuli. Primary auditory cortex activity can be modulated by visual stimuli. We were the first to show that your somatosensors cortex is activated visually when you see the tactile experience on someone else's body and the like. So it is really our, our, our, our realistic value of this approach is greatly amplified is if before addressing this empirical question you have a broader picture of the cultural context and you discovered that many people were smarter than you are and gave serious thought to this issue and came up with very interesting solutions. So I'm not denying the realistic value of cognitive neuroscience, actually the opposite. What I would like to see it employed in a better way than it still is by many of our colleagues that don't. That's my point. Let me make a few comments from the psychoanalytic end of things. I was very struck about with what you said about Warburg's interest in the neuron and the transmission of the impulse because that's what Freud was interested also. And when he worked on the project for a scientific psychology, that's essentially what he was doing. And what he was trying to do was take his observations which came primarily from observing patients who at the time were diagnosed as hysterics and had all sorts of crazy symptoms and tried to see how he could explain those symptoms by understanding the function and the energies that moved within neurons via the axon and so on. And he also talked about, therefore, the blocking of the impulse which is eventually what led to the theory of repression which then became the central theory in psychoanalysis because repression is what then defined and led to the notion of a dynamic unconscious which is, as Freud himself, distinguished it from other unconscious. The dynamic unconscious is what then influenced you in life by running your life a certain way as opposed to the other way. He also, of course, did do a lot of generalizing and he at times generalized too much. And part of those generalizations were the, and I should also just say, I think, because it's not often recognized that three or four of Freud's major works took, occurred within a period of two and a half to three years. Neuropsychology of defense studies in hysteria, interpretation of dreams, and the project. Now he was using some cocaine at the time, but it's a tremendous amount of work that came out from one brain. But one of the things he did, and because of the time he was working on these and things were not as complex and complexity wasn't recognized the way it is today, is that he did create some simplifying formula so that you had psychosexual phases of development, you had things like edipal complex which then served to generalize so people had castration anxieties, people. So it wasn't just on the individual level, but was generalized and then applied to larger issues. Psychanalysis I think has increasingly, without saying so, moved away from that and it has become a lot more about the careful long-term intense investigation of how one person's brain mind worked. And in every possible detail that can be made available by the patient in the mental frame of investigating himself or herself on the couch four or five times a week, and that does give us significant amount of information and what it does give us also is what you were saying is that everybody smiles, everybody dances, everybody says they love, but it's tremendously different. And that investigation I think is very important. When neuroscience became so popular, I mean there wasn't even neuroscience when I was in medical school, we talked about neurophysiology, neurochemistry, neuroscience, but neuroscience suddenly took off, there was also an overt excitement from the psychoanalytic end and similar things that are being done in neuroscience, putting somebody in an ephemera and saying there is the point of love happened in psychoanalysis by saying this behavior is because of this part of the brain. It's inevitable, those kinds of things. But I had a very interesting experience yesterday, I was honored by Christina to be invited to her lab, and I went to her lab and one of the graduate students presented his research to my mind, I'm not a scientist, it was very carefully done and well presented about an idea which he thought also confirmed Freud's idea, namely what we take for granted that his childhood experiences influence you later in life. But he did that with rats and showed how the effect of an electric shock and then showed it that what periods it becomes, if you will, a memory that has an impact on future behavior and at which point it doesn't. But then I was thinking about this and looking from the point of view of psychoanalysis, I was asking myself when a baby has experiences, he doesn't or she doesn't just have one thing happen, like an electric shock. But has a number of things and that these things interact. So the electric shock in the baby, hypothetical electric shock, may have an influence on the way he's going to feel about the milk and the way he's going to feel about the milk is going to influence something else. So that very early on, and the graduate student showed this beautiful slide of synaptic and neuronal development between the ages of six months, two years and four years and it's incredible the change. It's like you have a handful of neurons and synapses and then you have like a jungle. And so in this process, a lot of things are happening but they are all interacting with each other. And so I think this is where the fields can come together because you can have, you can just do that study or you can begin to think of it in a different context, in a larger way and see and begin to study how those experiences affect each other and what the consequence of it is, which may then have a connection to how, and this is the subject of this round table, you do or do not react or appreciate art. And so since you wrote a paper on this just recently, maybe you should say a few words about. Yeah. We decided to start investigating a static experience, not just dealing with the notion that are so heavily culturally determined like the sense of beauty, for example, but we were interested in investigating to which extent when you behold some artwork, particularly we decided with David to start from the most difficult part of this enterprise, namely to see what's going on in the brain body system of a beholder when there's no body to resonate along with. So we decided to start, not with the figurative art, but with modern abstract art. And the first experiment was done on Luchofontana's cuts. And the second one just came out on the brushstrokes of Franz Klein. And although we employed two different approaches, we employed high density EG. And in the first study, we just were happy to measure the level of this synchronization of the motor system of the beholder. So they're watching a static image, a cut by Luchofontana, and a controlled stimulus where the cut is substituted by a black line with the same length and width of the cut. But what is missing is the dynamic aspect of this static image, namely the shade produced by the cut in the depth of the canvas. And we never mentioned the word art, beauty, aesthetic experience. We only said to our volunteers, you're going to see images on the computer screen, please watch them carefully and try not to move as much as you can, because even blinking can introduce artifacts when you record brain activity with this net on the head. And the results were quite interesting and were fully compatible with the hypothesis David and I put forward in 2007, namely that when you see an object, a visual object which is the consequence of someone's hand gesture, the brain of the beholder, so to speak, produces an embodied simulation of the gesture. And what you see is the reenactment of that gesture, which is purely simulated because we recorded also the muscle activity of beholders and their muscles were completely silent. But a part of their motor system was, so to speak, reenacting the gesture of a perform by Lucio Fontana. And of course, we decided to employ Lucio Fontana's artworks, probably a cut done by myself or by Alessandro Milzka, the main author of this paper, would have worked the same. Although I was talking with the curator of the Contemporary Art Museum in Prato, the Pecci Museum, and he was telling me, you can cut a canvas a thousand times, but you will never accomplish the end result, Lucio Fontana's taste. And probably he's right, but nevertheless, and the second study was on the brush strokes of Franz Klein, here we had a more sophisticated approach that enabled us also to locate the sources of the signal in the brain. And so we found three components. So our analysis became a little more sophisticated, and you David will be happy to hear this because you left behind the infooloon part of aesthetic experience. You want to know more about the relationship between the brain and the evaluative aspect of aesthetic judgment. So basically we found three networks, a sensorimotor network which most likely responsible of the enactment of the gesture employed by the artist, so dynamic, so charged with emotion. Then we found activation in the orbit of frontal cortex, which probably I'm very cautious to establish this relationship because otherwise I would be guilty of the same oversimplified vision of the brain I was blaming before. But nevertheless, there is some evidence that links the activation of this ventral part of the frontal cortex with rewards. So probably has to do with the joy or the positive feeling induced by the aesthetic experience. And then we had the third cluster of activation in the Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex, which most likely has something to do with the more detached and evaluative observation of the artwork. Then we recently also investigated this relationship between the gesture employed to produce a static graphic sign and what's going on in the bottom system of the beholder. This time we employed handwritten Roman alphabet letters, Chinese ideograms, and scribbles. All three stimuli activate the motor system of the beholder, but they do it with a different intensity and with a different temporal dynamic. It is as if, and I'm very cautious, this is an hypothesis that has to be verified, it looks as if the motor system of the beholder were unconsciously capable of distinguished symbolic graphic sign which lead to a stronger resonance from the scribbles, which have no symbolic value. Which brings in a further question, is there any bio-mechanic, primitive shared by all forms of symbolic written language? This is an open question, no one so far addressed empirically, but these preliminary results seem to raise this as a possibility that can be empirically investigated. So far we focused on this relationship, the immediate relationship between something which is static, but at the same time is very intensively dynamic. And we believe that we discover one component that gives this dynamicity to something which is static. There is a wonderful decunic at the moment, the blue one, I don't remember the title of the painting. And every time I see it, I stand in front of it, I feel moved, not only metaphorically, but physically. And I think we can describe this component of the static experience, we can explain why we are so moved that something that is still but induces a lot of movement. And this is a possible way. It's a very good way to say that you didn't mention the world art, static to the students, or whatever the issue. Yeah, when we were measuring their brain activity. So, and were they aware that these were worked? Well indeed, at the end of the experiment, we asked them a lot of questions. You can imagine, we asked them to rate the quantity of dynamicity, of movement, they could spot in the static images. We asked them if they saw them before. We asked them if they considered either the original artworks or the control stimuli as artwork. And one of the most interesting results of this study is that the same effect could be detected in all participants, no matter how acquainted they were. And so why can you speak about the static experience? So how can you speak about the static experience if they are not aware that this is something link, I mean how do you define aesthetics? Well, because for them is something. Well, no, I don't ask him. I have a similar and related question. When you go in front of the ducomic, you say that I feel moved. So you are aware of something happening. In these experiments you did, were the activations similar, whether the person said at the end they were moved, they were not? There is all people rated as more moving the original artworks than the control stimuli irrespective from their knowledge, those images to belong to art or not. So there is a tight relationship between the dynamicity of the image recognized by the beholder and the degree of activation of their motor system. Then coming back to your question, of course there is nothing intrinsically aesthetic in a sense in this experiment, although the easiest way to answer your question would be to go back to the etymology of the world, the eye stasis. So to put it shortly, but I am happy to leave it to David. We never claim that aesthetic experience is the activation of the motor system of mirroring mechanism period. What we said that our point is that aesthetic experience is a multi-layered enterprise and one key dimension of aesthetic experience beside the socio-cultural context in which it occurs, the framing effect, blah, blah, blah. One key ingredient is this embodied ingredient. And this embodied ingredient is present in our relationship with all kinds of images, not necessarily because of their artistic status, which by the way is historically determined. I was reading a paper in the New York Times about the recent research showing that reading novels leads you to a more empathic. And they were making a distinction between a highbrow literature and I don't know what they employed. Fifty shades of gray, this kind of, we call it, Santini. One of them was a bit more amazing. So and journalist was asking me, what do you make of this distinction? I said, well, one should be very careful because Honore de Balzac, who is now revered as a classic, was publishing some of his Commedio men in newspapers. So all of these notion judgments, evaluation are very much historically determined. Even the very same notion of Bursat is historically determined. That's why the tension between the objective way of looking at it and the subjective is something which you cannot get rid. I mean, when you talk about art, you cannot avoid feeling this, this tension between art is made by by the evolution of culture. Art is, art is not only subjective thing. If you are a subject to be in front of something and you do not recognize it as art, probably is not art. I mean, it has to make sense. Yeah, but what we now call art, for example, think about people putting their hands in cover with pigments on caves. We call that art. Now, for them, probably had a completely different meaning. It was religion. It was the possibility to get into a different dimension. Nobody really knows what was the meaning of this practice. But still, I mean, even if you bracket this social, cultural, historical aspect that change a long time, there is something, I think, intimately related to our own human nature, which is a notion that for many decades was considered politically incorrect. Okay, the human being is a construction, like Foucault put it, but this construction is made of bricks that are always the same. That's the point. And cognitive neuroscience can reveal the nature of those. And that's been widely included. Yes, I think that a word evoked by Ed should be introduced in this conservation that is inhibition. I think that also David is working on this notion. Because when Victoria says that our response to images is a sort of motion and emotion response, so there is this idea of a motor reaction, the question is in the aesthetic attitude, where is the threshold between emotion that remains at a possible virtual or quasi-virtual response, reenactment, virtual embodied simulation? And when, for example, in front of some images, very often religious images, we are elicited to a real response. In Van der Lee's, for example, or in iconoclasm, David here is a specialist of these reactions. There you have violent responses, and there the motor system responds to images in a very effective way. Somehow, upholding the idea that the image, as I evoked in my first intervention, is a mediation between the stimulus and the response there in vandalism and iconoclasm. Image seems rather to be a sort of bomb eliciting a very violent reaction. I think that this is important also because I have started a work research comparing some images in which V Rosa and she is deciding to kill her kids, but she has not already killed them. She is there in the shadow, thinking of the strategy of the decision, but she hasn't taken the decision definitely yet. Or again, Rembrandt, the cloud use chivalis, a painting, Barbara was very fond of. They had a copy made for the institute and the copy is still hanging there today. The cloud use chivalis is there with the batavians gathered around the sacred table. They are deciding to go against the Romans, the invaders, but they haven't decided it yet. So what they will do, Freud Moses, in that essay Freud collects opinions from the Kuswissenschaft, from Borkert, from Verflin, and they all stress the fact that Moses is represented by Michelangelo in the very moment preceding the action. Freud describes, and of course he is very interested in the foot and the position of the angle of the foot of the statue. And we know that Barbara was obsessed with feet, the lymphose feet. And if you compare the gradiva foot, you find that this gradiva foot is very similar to the Moses one, almost 90 degrees. So this is Lesting's Lao-Kon, this is the pregnant moment before the decision. And this elicits, I think, a very interesting kind of empathy in the beholder that I would call the egetic, core narrative empathy, because your imagination starts working there. And you start asking yourself, what is it going to do? Is it going to slash his brother and all the rave party around the golden calf, or deciding something else? We know the story, of course, from the early text, but we can also imagine possible different options. And this is a saturation of narrative into a single image. It is an image of inhibition, it is an image of self-control, it is an image of the sofros uni again, of Bezon and Knight, of caution, of pre-decision, which is, I think, could be quite interesting to investigate even in the perspective of visual and motor systems. I'm hesitant to talk because it is not in direct response to what you said, but I do want to pick up some of the themes that have come up. One of this idea, as you said, very early influences. Well, the influences actually go quite early. There is evidence, for example, that what a mother ingests and that their trimester has an influence on the taste that the child would later have. And taste is an evaluative judgment, it is a preference. So these influences go very early, even before people are born. The question of this relationship between the individual experience and what can be generalized or how do we deal with that? There have been two strategies in cognitive neuroscience. And one, I think, in part, you alluded to, which was Freud's Roots, which came out of Charco's clinic, and that there is a long history of careful observations of individual patients and trying to make inferences of how systems work on the basis of the systematic way in which brain damage produces consequences. And I would take one minor exception to what Vittorio said, which is, I do not think cognitive neuroscience is a method. I think imaging has largely overwhelmed the public imagination of cognitive neuroscience, but it is fundamentally asking questions about what the brain basis for behavior is. And this goes back to the same intellectual climate that Freud was working on, that Warburg stepped into. You can take it back to Broca, Vernicki, Licktime, Lissar, Leepmann. These are the people that set out the agenda and the framework that we're still dealing with. And so part of what got me interested in neurosthetics was from the observation that when patients have brain damage, some patients that are artists, that they continue to produce art, and their art is actually, this is the exception, not the rule, but their art is actually better or received as better than what it was before. This is the only major cognitive system where that observation has been made. There are sensory phenomenon in which that observation has been made, but if you talk about language, if you talk about any complex phenomenon, this kind of paradoxical facilitation in the setting of brain damage is something that has only really been reported in art. And that's telling us something important. It's telling us something important about the biologic infrastructure that is in the context of producing art is sufficiently flexible. And one thing that these sort of detailed examinations of single cases I think can really be illuminating in a way that you, as you were suggesting, that Freud did you take individual patients and then you try to generalize from that in a way that analysis can only be done on individuals because as soon as you take a group, you're washing away what is most interesting about that behavior. The second strategy that I think Vittoria alluded to, which is that in cognitive neuroscience, there has been an interest in individual differences. And I'll give you an example of art study we did which has been presented in abstract form but not written up, which is there's a fundamental question of if you say, do you like a Rothko painting or do you like Hopper that there is nothing inherently correct about which answer you give, right? This is an individual difference thing. Some people like abstract art, some people like representational art, some people like historic art, some people like contemporary art, so on and so forth. So when you're dealing with that kind of massive variability, how do you approach this as a scientist? And what we did was, and this was with a group of schizophrenics and people with schizophrenia as well as people with the normal controls, and basically did the kind of experiment where people are shown pairs of paintings and they say which is better, which you like more, right? And you go through a whole series of these, and we also had these rather than evaluative components, descriptive components where you say which painting is, has warmer hues versus cooler hues and things like that. So the trick here is that the assumption is that if you're looking at preference, which is variable, it's still showing that you're looking at the difference. So this should be the case that if someone prefers A over B and B over C, they should prefer A over C, right? Whatever your intro metric is, which may be different, it needs to be consistent. And so the question for us was then, using people's individual differences allows us to give an access of what people's consistency are, so then the question becomes consistency. And what we are able to show is that in this group of schizophrenic individuals that as a group to things, they're less consistent than people without schizophrenia. They are less consistent in the evaluative judgment, which is this preference as compared to the descriptive judgment. So it's not that they're just inconsistent, they'll say whatever they want, it's specifically about their preference. And then the other interesting thing is if you look across the people with schizophrenia, of course it's not that they're all bad, that there's some variability, and then you leverage that variability. And what we find is that the greater the variability in people's preferences judgment correlates with how they also describe their hedonic experiences. So you give them other kinds of questionnaires, and so it turns out that people who have a kind of what has been referred in the literature as anticipatory pleasure, the pleasure of anticipating what might happen, that people who had decreased anticipatory pleasure were also the ones that were the most variable. So now you take that back to the biology, it turns out that models of anticipatory pleasure seem to really rely on dopamine. Dopamine is at least an important system that seems to be abnormal in people with schizophrenia. And what we don't know from this is whether this has to do with the medications they're on or something inherent about the biology of their disease. So that remains unknown. But I offer this as a suggestion how you can use, you can actually leverage the variability of the individual responses to honor the individual response and at the same time try to get a generalizing principle out of it. Yeah, I think most of us would probably agree that dopamine plays a role in aesthetic pleasure. But I want to go back, I mean these are really interesting historians, I want to go back to the discussion we were having earlier, partly raised by Victoria and then affirmed by Andrea. And this is a discussion which brings together Freudian views of inhibition, Freudian views of culture, the work of the neurosciences, but it's all a meeting I think in all our discussions we are meeting one very significant issue which I'm going to come to in a moment. I think the issue is slightly vitiated by these statements, slightly apodictic statements that people make, you made it, there's quite a lot, art is. I think we should probably just relinquish any kind of declaration about what art is. Because we kind of know now that we don't know what art is. I mean you go to any art gallery and you, art may just be what people pay the most money for, we don't know. So this whole issue was brought home to me with some force, I remember Chris Wood said he may have been drinking a bit much that evening, but he said exasperatedly to me after I gave a lecture about the sort of motor dimension of aesthetic response which Victoria described very accurately, he said oh, why don't you realize that all art is irony? I mean he was being kind of epigromatic that evening and I was very exasperated by this, but he raised a very important issue which is I don't think all art is irony, but consistently with this view that I don't think we should say what art is or not. But you know we talk about aesthetic appreciation, aesthetic evaluation, aesthetic enjoyment, I just did that, but what really lies at the bottom of all of this, as Kant wrote, is aesthetic judgement. I mean we can talk a bit about aesthetic pleasure and aesthetic, you know how our feelings are affected, but what is moot is not what art is, but what is that moment in which, you know what happens at that moment when we make an aesthetic judgement. And that moment must surely be a moment of a certain kind of removal, of reclaiming of the self against involvement with the work of art. And this seems to me our sense of absorption in the work of art to use, you know here's Michael Friedkaring on for years about absorption's role in our aesthetic responses. What really we need now to do, and I think, I'm trying to convince Victoria to do an experiment with me on precisely what removes the self from its empathetic engagement with the work. What happens then as it were, you know what exactly do we mean when we talk about inhibition, what's happening in the brain, you know there are various candidates for the inhibitory factor. And I somehow think it's somewhat down in Basil Ganglia, he says no it's much forward in prefrontal cortex. So here is a real issue which can be discussed which will get us back to what seems to me, you know at least a clear framing of the question, which is the framing in terms of the moment in which we realize we are not in the object, but we are sufficiently detached to make a judgement. And this is Andrea and Varburg's notion of Dankham in which you have the space for contemplation and you have a sense of the realization of who you are as a judging self. So that's a project that you know we've got to get on with as it were. Yeah. I can comment on that. So again going back to individual classes and this notion of inhibition of movements in a way that might seem agentic. So there's a classic relatively rare but classic neurologic syndrome called the Alien Hand Syndrome. And this is one in which we've done one of the few experimental studies of such a patient. So let me just describe it for people who are not aware of this. This is a situation where someone's hand, it's typically on one side, seems to be to perform behaviors that seem complex but over which they have no control. And so the particular man that we studied about seven or eight years ago, I mean he would come in and he'd sit down and he'd sit down on his hand because he didn't want his hand doing things that he had no control over. These kinds of, or he'd grab a magazine or a cup and hold this because as long as his hand was occupied it wouldn't do things. But what are the kinds of things it does is that it will, he'll walk by a light switch and his hand will reach up and start doing this turning on and off on and off on and off the lights. And there are a variety of these kinds of behaviors and what we, and his lesion, just so you know the part of his brain that was damaged is the medial part of the frontal lobe, right? The classic location for this kind of phenomenon. What we were able to show is the conditions in which this happens are two. One is that the control over affordances that most of us normally have, he didn't have. And what do I mean by that? Which is if you see a cup with a handle there is a kind of affordance that makes you want to grasp it, right? And it's likely that the mirror neuron system is in fact involved in that kind of experience. Most of us can choose to do this or not. And it should be clear that most of us, our motor systems operate below consciousness most of the time, right? Where usually you think about every time you drive to work or you walk to work you are not really aware of all the little decisions you're making. We largely respond to things in the environment with our motor systems and that's what this person was doing but unlike the rest of us is not able to control it. The second piece of this is he was exquisitely aware of this. So if you have damage bilaterally you get something called utilization behavior where people do this but they're completely apathetic about it. So he had this monitoring system over his own motor behavior. At the same time he didn't have control over one side and then this creates this sense that this limb is doing something of which he has no control over, right? It's completely responsive to the environment. And so it's a kind of a problem within ambition. At the same time there's awareness you have to have both of those things simultaneously to have this kind of phenomenon. I think even though I know we can talk a lot more about this it's time to go for question and answers. So anybody who has a question has to walk up to the microphone there and ask questions. Peter, there are two papers. Siri you want to ask? Most of the discussion this morning has been on the tension between generalization and you begin with that and the particular case and your characterization of psychoanalysis. It's a single case and what do you have? So I'd like to say. I practice analysis in Los Angeles and I've analyzed Chinese and Japanese and Latino, I have a Latino, young lady, Iranians and so on and you get a picture of the culture. And with that I want to say with Abi Barbour today when we're getting to a man embedded in the German-Jewish elite of Hamburg, major banking firm that you all know branches in New York and so on. And he suffered and consciously from anti-Semitism. He was a soldier in the German army prior to World War I and was unable to get promoted to reserve office here. He was a very symbolic, full of prestige. Much's labor wrote a brilliant critical piece on the position of the German reserve office here and he writes to his mother also as he's a student in Strasbourg. How he hears other students and people in pubs issuing anti-Semitic remarks. And he's very aware he's unhappy about it. He calls it motion, which is an imitation of Yiddish. Now, that's not all. There is a huge, very significant Cartai, it's Cartai 61 in the archive, the Barbour archive, and it is his collection, his method of working was to collect clippings from the days newspapers of things that interested him and there are large collection of clippings about the ritual murder myth in Eastern Europe, in Kiev, the Bayless case, in Konev, in East Prussia. You know, he collected these and this was the raw, savage underside of European culture they was very aware of. And it's significant that the breakdown, the psychotic breakdown came in November 1918. Now that's not a random date. That's the date of the collapse of the Wilhelmian Empire. And it's a date where his peer and friend Albert Balene, whose name you might know, the Hamburg America line, the Hamburg-Ost-Africa line, the Hamburg-Ost-Oggian line, these were all creatures of, he was the CEO of this Empire of sea power in Germany. He suicided in November 1918. And that's where he had his psychic collapse. And we look for, in psychoanalysis, the specificity. Why on that date? And what's the specificity of the delusions? And the delusions were murder and blood poisoning. He tells Benzwanger, you're feeding me human blood. I'm not going to eat this meal. I suggest to you that what you really want to know out of psychoanalysis is the culture that he comes from. And he and his brother, there was an event in the middle of World War I in 1916. It's called the Yudin Seilung, where the Prussian general staff ordered a census of all the Jews in the German military. Now nothing like that took place on the Italian army, the French army, British army. But they were with a purpose of derogating and deprecating the Jews, trying to show they weren't doing their part. And fact is that after this census, the results were suppressed. They were never published until Franz Josef Strauss in the Boletus Republique was the foreign strike, that defense minister, and he published the results because the contribution of Jews had been magnificent to World War I. So this is the world he comes from. And when he sees murders and so on, he saw them and he collected data on them, extensive data on German anti-Semitism, on European primitive hatred of the Jews. And I suggest it comes back in the psychosis. That's an intro to your panel tomorrow I think. This is quicker and it's about lesions and it relates to something David said and to what you said, which is individual differences and lesions. So even in alien hand syndrome, you can get someone unbuttoning a shirt. But also the famous case that I've forgotten the neurologist name of the self-strangling. And also amygdala lesions do not produce identical results by the way. They're a huge variation. So I wanted to just pick that up about individual differences. Is there a question of content, individual psychic content in something like say self-strangling in alien hand syndrome? Maybe two comments about that. And thanks for the question. So one thing it turns out that an alien hand syndrome is that the repertoire of behaviors are fairly restricted. There are certain grasping behaviors, there are repetitive behaviors. They're actually the kinds of things not unlike what you see when people have motor seizures and what healing Jackson talked about as this sort of grammar of movements where you have these elements that are built on. What we argued in this paper is that what you see in alien hand syndrome are concatenations of these motor primitives and that you would never ever have the situation where someone's alien hand would, for example, write a poem. That could never happen on this model. Whereas if you really think of this as there's an alien being on the divided self, that the divided self would actually perform some intentional goal directed behavior, it turns out that that's probably not the case. The individual differences in terms of the consequences of brain damage is extraordinarily interesting and the biology of that we don't really know very much. So it is the case that often what you will read in the literature are these sentinel cases. But if you see a lot of the patients, what you are struck by is that the same kind of damage that produces vernicus ephasia that was so instrumental and important in thinking of how language is organized in the brain is not what happens in everybody. And not only that, what happens six months down the road is highly variable in terms of how people recover. Now what's the biology of that? Why is it that some people do better initially? Why is it that some people do better down the road? There are some ideas around it. There are certain genetic predispositions. For example, people better homozygous for apo-e-elleals that is a predisposing factor for Alzheimer's disease. It looks like that might have been more generalizable to how the brain responds to injury. But what the mechanisms around that are not known, it may be a wiring issue, which is where if we took everybody in this room that is over the age of 50 and got high resolution MRI scans, the amount of white matter abnormalities, assuming everybody in here is normal, is going to be highly variable. And so the consequences of that, of this kind of subclinical low level, and I hesitate to use the word damage because it's not expressed in any way, it might have consequences for recovery. And the individual differences in organization at that level, which is increases as you get older. So as Vittoria said, if you're doing 20-year-old college students, you've already filtered this to a very narrow segment, right? But I think those are exactly the kinds of questions a biologist needs to ask and try to address. Just walk through the microphone. Okay, sure. Professor Galese's correlation of the motor system and Lucio Fontana and Franz Klein, I'm an art historian and a psychoanalyst and I've worked with a lot of artists. I've thought a lot about Ernst-Chris's image magic, the idea that an artist is trying to create life in the work. And I worked on Giacometti and Louise Nevelson and both of them, and I think many other artists and many of the artists I've worked with, are aiming in some way, consciously or preconsciously, to create a sense of life. And that is the dynamic quality. Looking at artwork that succeeds in doing that, even if it's the pregnant moment before the action, there is a sense for an artist who is aiming to make that work that he or she is trying to do something with what Louise Nevelson called livingness. I think artists have different ways of describing it, but it seems very related to the correlations that you are finding in the work that you're doing. Thank you. Pierre. So I would like to make a comment on what Bitoro said and I fully agree with you with the current trend of cognitive neuroscience and the reductionistic, let's call it, you know, consequences of being subject to considerable pressure by journals to come up with papers that have a large N, a number of subjects that you can make statistics on. And you know, I'm an experimental neurobiologist. I also like you try to publish in the good journals and we all play that game. But the issue is that it looks like we may need and just, you know, comes out of this discussion and thinking, you know, a forum where this vicious cycle in a way which, you know, you are forced in a way to have a large and erased individual differences or try to focus on the data that show more consistency across individuals to be able to publish in the best journals. And okay, you probably provide useful information. I don't say that this is not useful. So I fully agree with you. We are part of the game and we'll do it. But on the other hand, it's very impoverishing. We lose a lot of information like this. And so I think, you know, let's think about how to push this, the value of individual observations and provide a forum for this in a way that is, of course, scientifically sound. It's not just to, you know, decrease the quality of the studies. Quite the contrary. But the tools, the expensive toys that you're talking about can be used much with a much more incisiveness if we were able to provide the right framework for an rigor for studies of individuality. I think it's an excellent idea. And if I know you enough, it will. We should expect some development. Yeah, let's think about it. I think you're definitely right. And I'm very sympathetic with the onion because I think we share a strong background in clinical neuropsychology. Because when people nowadays think about cognitive neuroscience, I'm speaking specifically of cognitive neuroscience. Most people think about the defensive toys we were discussing before, neglecting the fact that one of the most historically speaking, but also nowadays, although it's getting more and more difficult to publish single cases, almost impossible. We learned a lot about the relationship between brain behavior and cognition by studying single patients. And I think it's really a sad thing that the enormous pressure we all receive, in a sense, living in Italy is a privilege. You can take a lot more risk because nobody cares what you do. It's interesting. I'm trying how to see the positive aspect of that. But in other countries where there's a lot of attention about what you produce, so the emphasis is more and more on quantity, sometimes at the expense of, I mean, I'm not disputing that all of these people have enormous technical quality. What gets lost is why are we doing this? Why are we publishing? No, that's why they want to make the brain. But I think cognitive neuroscience and all that, what has been published in those circles and with that kind of philosophy, I think it's very useful and brought a lot of knowledge to how brain works. I think we understand it's a major progress, so I'm not disputing this. But I think we are losing a lot of information. And that's a pity. Well, it's interesting because we had Professor Andrea Califano here. And he's at Columbia and he's a microbiologist and studies cancer. What seems to be happening more and more in cancer study is studies of N of 1. Okay, interesting. Which would be great if it happened in R.P. I mean, I can give you an example. I do a Professor's rounds at a rehabilitation hospital in Philadelphia. And last week, the case that was presented to me turned out to be incredibly fascinating and it relates to something that you were saying, which is this is a guy who was alexic, couldn't read, but had a very specific kind of alexia that I have not seen in the last 30 years, which is he had difficulty identifying individual letters. But that has been observed. But what's different about him is that he could identify without any difficulty individual numbers. So the graphemic complexity of numbers and letters are exactly the same. He can see numbers. He can't identify letters. My first thought is we need to bring him in the lab and really study this and sort out what's happening at that level of visual processing in relation to these symbolic forms, which are letters and numbers, which have no inherent meaning other than our associations and how is this even possible. But no takers. None of my postdocs are all involved in programmatic research. And these cases require a lot of work because you have to really think through. You can't just set it in motion. But this is the kind of thing that I think because, again, our funding mechanisms that it is not and publishing constraints, I mean, these sorts of little unique NF1 studies that really have the potential to teach you something important. We're just letting them slip through our fingers. Okay, I think we need to stop because we have one more question. And then we will stop because we have another, we have Professor D.D. Woberman who is going to, is it right? No, he's not right. You're not the right? Yes, he's there. I thought I saw him. Yeah. So Christina, did you have a question also? I wanted a comment. Okay, right after this one comment from Christina and then we'll move on. Okay, thank you, let me introduce myself. My name is Lisa Farber and I'm an art historian. I'm the former student of Tom Kaufman. So that's probably why I'm here. I've heard your discussion. Please forgive me, I have to use my notes. Dr. Glazie was talking about the evaluation of immediate human sort of responses to visual images and that these responses were in some way consistent. And then you were all speaking about the relationship between neuroscience and the evaluation and reception of images. And there was one comment about the possible influence of early life experiences like mother's milk, you know, on the aesthetic taste later in life. I would like to know if the scientists here have really thought about the part of the brain that affects human memory and how that is a determining factor in people's responses to images. I would also like to suggest and I've studied Roboc naturally because I worked at Princeton and Tom Kaufman as a student of the Roboc Institute. I would also like to suggest that human memory shapes responses to images and that in viewing a work of art, it may be precisely that moment that David Freberg mentioned, the moment when the immediate physical response stops and then your memory kicks in, you relate what you're seeing to what you already know and that determines your human response. Anyway, I think that Roboc was interested in the gestures and the motifs that let's say Batacelli was using from ancient works of art and how that influenced the reception of his painting in the 15th century. And then also he was thinking about the images of Albrecht Dürer and how the reception in Germany in the early 20th century was in part affected by people's familiarity, people's memory of those images. So I think that human memory is something that I haven't really heard discussed here very much and is there a part of the brain that you could measure because I think that some of the art historians here perhaps David Freberg or Christopher Wood or Andrea Beyer or perhaps myself, we have a slightly different visual memory or ability to memorize images, or call things and so that may determine why we become art historians and also how the regular population understands images. The next comment was made from Christian, I was a memory expert. By the way, we have a session on memory, right? No, actually my comment was not about that but we're going to have a discussion tomorrow. Yeah. I know all dedicated discussion to memory and art and emotions and all those connections. My comment was actually about what Pierre was saying and all the discussion that was going on and I think I hope this is not trivial but I want to make sure that we are distinguishing two different levels of analysis. One is the group analysis to understand the general principles and this is where we started because we know basically nothing when we started in many fields and so that has to be done. That would be an individual analysis and then another level equally important is the individual analysis but that we need to find the way to do that scientifically in a very solid way. So what are the controls and that it has now been developing more and more clearly. Even in the animal studies, there are the group studies as well now the individual differences coming out of the group analysis. So I don't think it's a matter of selecting which paper is going to be published. I hope that's not what we're doing. I think those are two different levels that needs equally both to be understood and scientifically, solidly. Thank you. So we'll have about a 10 minute break and then Professor Hoberman will give his paper and then we'll stop for lunch and we resume at what time Rob? Two o'clock. Thank you for sending that to me by the way.