 I have the pleasure to present you, George L. Ebermann. I don't know exactly how I will do that. I saw that in the program of Hans-Wakie-Wiege, it was your book in the middle of the program in an excellent position, the surviving image. I don't know exactly how to say in English about Nachlebahn. It's an excellent book of George L. Ebermann, which is not yet translated in English, perhaps no. We are waiting for that because it is an important book about Abi-Barbog and this unnamed science, which include and extended beyond the limit of different sciences. And I think we are in the same dispositive at Nachlebahn created the same frame of thinking. We are with history, philosophy, anthropology, ethnology, perhaps metrology, psychology, and also biology, looking for another science which is beyond the limit of these different sciences. And I think it is the experience that we will do during these two days. And the purpose of our own table is to revisit the important concept of Abi-Barbog, like Nachlebahn, Patos Formal, Memosin, and it is important to have now a discussion with you. And you have to use the podium. Thank you very much, Francois. I'm so happy to be posted. How is the type of knowledge inaugurated by Warbog useful as today, useful for us today? Shouldn't we say simply that it is useful for opening the territory of that major science, this royal science has to use the vocabulary of gildolos and phillics gateri from their essay on the cartography of knowledge, mil plato? That is history as such. Notice, opening can be understood in two senses at least. To open is to enlarge, but it's also to wound. Now, this is not the same thing for the science of history, which is my interlocutor here. To accept its opening to images under the angle of enlargement as it is under the angle of perforation. To enlarge its domain to images means to accept certainly new objects, but it is also to capture them, to enclose them, under a common administration that pre-exists them. This is to envisage interdisciplinarity from the perspective of territorial relations, so that opening itself to images reduces, more or less, reduces the extending of its empire, its authority over new landscapes and objects. Totally different is the opening that wounds perforate traverses the territory that hosts the operation. This opening alone possesses a critical dimension, dimension, I think, an extraterritorial capacity to cross the frontiers, to create unsuspected paths and to modify the plane of consistency of the territory traversed. The work of Vabog has long been recognized for its capacity to enlarge the territory of the historian and also art history. But it seems more difficult today, even as yesterday, to recognize its capacity to wound, to critique this territory itself. It is not by chance that the importance of this critical aspect of Vabog's work has been recognized before everyone else by historians of art who were careful to construct their arguments philosophically, like at Garvinte in the 30s, and by philosophers who are aware of cultural history as, for instance, Georgiou Agamben, because your quotation of the La Chienza sensea no me is an expression taken by Georgiou Agamben from the art historian Robert Clam. This meant that we are in this discipline, like in a battlefield, a field of battle. It's a perpetual replenaging into the game of clashing theories where certain objects are studied against others in order that certain models of historicity are meaning, and meaning, excuse me, are made to emerge against others. It is thus that confronting the iconographic sign that Erwin Panowski enlarged into an iconological symbol, a Vabog will in advance, construct the hypothesis of a regime of images based on a paradoxical economy, a visual, a temporal, a signifying economy of what I would call, and here in this house, it's significant, the symptom, that third at the same time was elaborating into illuminating new shocking theory. It's impossible for me to go into the details here, concerning the complexity of these epistemologic debates. Perhaps it will be enough to recall certain lines of divisions. There where Panowski was thinking of the symbol. By way of the logical development of a theme, as was shown, for instance, in his brilliant deduction of the iconography of Dürer's Melancholy as deriving from ancient and medieval premises synthesized for the occasion, Vabog was exposing figurative symptoms through the paradoxical not the deuxion, eruption of a memory of unconscious movement. That entered into conflict with the common sense given of a shared culture. In short, when the symbol unites, the symptom divides. There where the symbol brings into accord in a common cultural territory, the symptom mobilizes a disturbing transversal across that territory. There where the symbol is handed down by a tradition, for instance, humanism, the symptom migrates and perforates the traditional evidence of common sense by what I call an anachronistic accident, for instance, the unexpected eruption of a Arab astrologer at the heart of a cycle of Renaissance frescoes. There where the symbol speaks of a conformity of images and of discourses, the symptoms reveals as many of their differences, their failures to communicate, their conflicts, their incommensorabilities. There where the world of symbols appear in the coherence of its unity, that of symptoms puts into play an unexpected diversity of montage, montages, heterogeneity. There where the symbol includes us in the encompassing world of a great cultural infrastructure where everyone needs to recognize, the symptom brings to the surface, as though pulling it up from below, perforating elements that, in their local space, booby traps, such an identification. Therefore, the symbol cementizes the present from a prolonged past, the symptom de cementizes the present from an instance of forgetting that explodes as a repetition, nachthaglicate, return of the repressed, etc. One should understand that it's the entire psychic, temporal, and visual economy which finds itself here, divided, in this way between the encompassing territory of symbols and the traversing movements of the critical movements of symptoms. One example, will perfectly, I suppose, illustrate this economy. We could even think of it as a kind of a lagerie. It is Abi-Vabo's gradiva. The name of her is NINFA. Singled out by Vabo in Florence during the period between 1888 and 1893 when he was preparing his thesis on the mythological paintings of Botticelli. Vabo was attempting to make an archaeology of the first Italian Renaissance based on a new object that was first assigned to representation and then generalized to all forms of cultural life, symbolic lives, therefore. This object, that object, was the living motion for which Befobaticelli, Donatello, for example, Montenier II, especially Donatello, went in search of models from paradoxically living motion, but the models were found on the sides of Roman sarcophagi, death, where they found impassioned poses of lamentations, but also erotic pursuits, dramatic scenes of war, etc. What fascinated Vabo as he stood in front of Botticelli's paintings, or similarly reading the poem of Politiano, the theoretical press question of Alberti, etc. was thus, I quote, the remarkable attempt to delineate transitory movement, basing his research on such a common evidence, therefore I repeat, symbolic form. Vabo wanted to focalize his gaze on a figure-out, a particularity, which in the art of Renaissance Florence repeated itself from place to place, never finding itself thematized as such, but breaking the surface and insisting like a symptomatic form, modifying in-depth the economy of images. Whether they were employed as corporal resemblances, perspectival constructions, likeness of Vabo, Alberti's Historia. Thus, this symptomatic form modifies the representation of motion, for example, of a character who walks or runs transversely to the supplement of two fundamental processes, firstly, as a question of a displacement of intensity, which marks itself notably in an unexpected contrast between the sculptural impenetrability of Venus in Botticelli, and the impassioned dance of the bevectors by Vek, the accessory in movement, unbound hair, draperies, the wind. The second process, fundamental, is insufferable from the first. Here, it's a matter of something that one could name an eccentric, transversal symptomatic forces at play, and of their capacity to sweep the representation like a breath of air, be it a breeze or a high wind, to sweep the space where it's superviness, where it passes, where it occurs in French, passé, and ilse passqué, que chor. A lot of troubling things outside of the center of Renaissance paintings, as for instance, in the primavera. Look at the right, the right border. Zéfir is fecundating the nymph Clarisse, and the latter already vomiting her children in the form of a bracelet of flowers escaping from her mouth. One must define these weird scenes as transversal, since they modify from one border to the other, the totality of the image is affected by those motions, be it on this chromatic level, but photographs of the verbal thesis, so the chromatic level is, I'm sorry, it's not here, the level of the dynamism of forms or of their significance, of course, finally. It is equally necessary to qualify them as eccentric in so far as especially their emerged, most often along the borders of the painting, and metaphorically they denote what Verbo wanted to call the external cause of the image, external cause of which he sought to theorize the psychic tenor from the side of Fantasia and dream images, images of memory, images of desire at the same time, images tied to passion, that is to say, to a regime situated below that of consciousness, just as a wind is eccentric by definition, to the place it sweeps, of course, the id to the ego that is upset, and the symptom to the symbolic world where we have taken our bearings and habits so to the ninja that figure in movement who seems in Renaissance images to have emerged from the backstage and come to modify the total economy of the representation in making something impassioned, something of the memory of the desire, which passes here. Verbo recognized innumerable instances, but it's a leaf, leaf, peep, peep, in turic, manteña, Leonardo, perugino, rafero, et cetera, et cetera, but when they, looking at the border of one of Girlandaio's frescoes in the Santa Maria novella in Florence, he discovered something like the contestants of this phenomenon, and yet it was only a serving girl, modest, humble, carrying a plate of fruit on her head. But it was a photograph of this gracious figure that came to be carefully framed and glued on the cover of a new notebook from 1900, entitled, Ninfa Fiorentina. The manuscript presents us with a collection of fragments for what Verbo envisioned as his noon-fenn project. At first, it takes the form of a friendly correspondence between the historian and the linguist Andrei Yales. On the question of Girlandaio's female figure that we see enter, so to speak, from the right handboarder of the fresco, which is depicting the birth of Saint John the Baptist in the Tona Boni Chapel in Santa Maria novella. There's no doubt that Yales, in his text, has already integrated all the aesthetic and theoretical observations contained in the preceding analysis of Verbo on the representation of living motion. Thus, what Verbo had revealed under the iconographic angle of the erotic pursuit, Zeffi, Chlorix, Apollo Daphne, Yales had maliciously displaced as a virtual play between the spectator himself and the Ninfa, like the le Porcivir, which so's it grace in the works of Girlandaio. In the manuscript, there is this phrase by Yales, Chéchilapham, mine Lieber. He wrote this in order to make clear that it's a matter of desire, like an inadmissible symptom in the midst of the religious sin depicted in the Tona Boni Chapel. He evokes the ethereal grace of her steps, making of her a cosy pagan goddess, a practically extraterrestrial, he says, creature, just as the air seems equally animated, just for her, this is a close space, with a local wind that swells her antique dress, swells her antique dress, in short. This young Ninfa seems to be something like a phantom of feminine grace, who traverses the scene with her light footsteps, and almost high aerial creature, an apparition that even provokes in Yales a sentiment of imma-repressible unheimly, something between a nightmare and a tale for children, he says. So new questions present themselves, questions that Váburgi was really asking himself, this question especially, where have I already seen her, which is very psycho-analytical, of course. This was a wave of Váburg to dialogue not only with Yales but with himself, through the most radical prism of his conceptual scheme, namely that of Naftleben, as the symptomatic model of the temporality of images. Not only did Gerlandaio not respect the dogmatic iconography of the religious order that owned the church, but he even in accordance with Tarnabroni instructions, probably, sprinkling that figure of the Ninfa, all over the place, which soon provoked the anger of Savonarola, by the way. This is presentation of the Virgin in the same channel. You see these two charming children who emerged from the two borders of the Marriag of the Virgin, here on their female dancers, traversing the nomination of John the Baptist, of course, Salome, in the operation of the angel to the Carriers. There is a representation in Barriagliaef and also this angel, a young, effeminate, winged man, clothed, alantica. And in the ultraviolet massacre of the innocence, there are some quasi-menads transformed into furies, avatars of media. Finally, there is this young woman who is a wonderful young woman, carrying fruits as in the birth of John the Baptist, and she emerges in Grisail, like a phantom, from the background, the background of the visitation. We are thus put confronted with a truly figurative strategy, a strategy of nomadic apparitions, eruptions, interruptions. Ninfas do appear here and there as this symptomatic figure coming from who knows where. Again, antiquity surely, but which one? Under what name? The nymph, graciously, opens the symbolic conventions of the space which she traverses and modifies with the kind of perverse innocence, if I may say so. In reality, two territorial logics are attacked, critic, that is to say, put into crisis by this nomadic figure. The first territory is that of church itself, in its role as a sacred place, and also in its role as a community of believers, values, taboos, of course. From this point of view, it's almost indecent in such a context to see the emergence of a figure as clearly sensual as this, on whose drapery accentuates the contours at the anterior level of the arms, the thighs, the breasts, with that gravity-defying body from the bare feet to the denser's pace. Doesn't the Atlantic address by itself impose already an image of a pagan goddess or nymph in this scene consecrated to the chaste, precursor of Christ? The second territory that is attacked and perturbed by the emergence of the nympha is none other than the solemn bourgeois one of the Tonaboni family, the church, the family. George O'Vazari has well described the birth of St. John the Baptist as a scene of a kind directly referring to the rights of maternity in Quattrochante Florence. He says there is a beautiful woman who carries following the Florentine custom, fruits and flasks of wine from the country. We can see then, with this precise example, how far the cycle of Géralandayo, in spite of his religious iconography, is inscribed with the lay cymbals of the Florentine bourgeoisie, whom Christian Clapiers-Yubeyer has dedicated a wonderful and tropical study, and of whom Joseph Schmidt has analyzed the issues in work on the Tonaboni chapel itself. In the symbolic economy, I say symbolic, of the birth of St. John the Baptist, the younger who emerges from the right-hand side of the image is thus only a simple servant. According to a long-established custom in Florence, she carries from the country, from Villa, outside to Palazzo in the city. Fresh fruits and wine, which will give force to the mother, lying in bed after the birth within the walls of her Palazzo. But the symptomatic economy of the Ninefa appears when we discover in that very conformity the critical effect resulting from differences that are incarnated by the young serving girl in her stride. We observe, for instance, how much she differs from the other serving girl, the one who, in the background of the scene, carries also the same flasks to her mistress, and we catch ourselves, imagining that the two figures are perhaps two versions, two fashions, to see the same serving girl. Why not? Just an hypothesis. The effect of strangeness is found in any case, doubled. On one side, the young serving girl with no name. In the economy of the portraits, the young lady in the center, she has a name, a prosopography, artistry, history of portraits, okay, names. This serving girl with no name in the economy of the portraits, which are besides those of the great family, sorry. And the young lady has also two servants, with her. On the other side, the young serving girl comes from elsewhere, from another symbolic space, from another time, the past epoch of paganism, and another time than that of the bourgeois ceremony, the now of Florentine customs, or the evangelical event, the past of sacred history. They are all means, these are all means, to denote the extraterritoriality, the eccentric and perturbin, and in short, what I would call critical character of the NINFA. Why does this figure travel not only the figurative production of the Renaissance, but as well, the entire body of Abba Vabo's work? Because she crystallizes, and up to a point of view, and she realizes, just like Graziva for Fjöd, a goodly portion of his theoretical choices, his objects of interpretation, and his models of historicity. We are hardly surprised that a panel of Mne Mosine atlas has been dedicated to her. The NINFA, Aerta Lándiesel, a Lugerizad 1st, Nafleben, the survival, the afterlife, constructed by Abba Vabo as a model of temporality necessary to understand the economy of a recollection of images that was reducible neither to the idealistic principles of the imitation of the ancient, nor to the positivistic to an iconographic tradition. NINFA consequently offers us the complexity of a trans iconographic and trans historical model in the context of a representation that refers to the classics. The NINFA is still only an adequate citation. Iconographic sign perfectly consistent with the symbolic universe that stages it. Classics, Roman, Greek. But in a context of Christian representation as is the case here in the nerve center of the largest Dominican church in Florence it's the same in the case of Saint Mary Magdalene being represented at the foot of the cross with the features of a minute, a hair unbound, stripped of clothing, violent, such as with unbound hair, violent and stripped of our clothings. Which is how Donatello, or here, Bertoldo de Giovanni, present her for instance. Therefore the NINFA becomes a critical citation. It's a citation, but a critical one. She makes something surface as a counter motif and unconscious of representation. In short, it's a symptom. It's a fleeting, fossil traversing figurative space like an accident or an unbidded phantom. Moreover, the NINFA incarnates and allegorizes the economy of that Patos formel that Abbivarborg tried to describe in the lateral transmissions and the missing links in the long du dure of occidental art. It's not simply a matter of opposing static representation of medieval to the living motion in Renaissance, but it's also necessary to understand the phenomena of intensification of movement. This problem is crucial in which Italian art from Polayolo to Michelangelo experimented with all the possibilities. In the fresco of Guillandaleo, the NINFA opposes her dynamism against the immobility of all the other figures. But she's not satisfied with merely working graciously as everything converges in intensifying her motion. The position of her body, her left foot that is slightly lifted up, the robes streaming in the wind, and therefore enlarging her gesture and propagating it around her. We rediscover here a characteristic of Renaissance visual culture, the importance of which has been shown, of course, by Michael Betsendall and also Sharon Fermor. That is the strictly choreographic fashion of envisioning the human gesture in representation. There is no doubt besides that the recognition of these processes of intensification responded in Verborg's work with a theoretical awareness of intensified forms in the total epistemic of his own time, aesthetic of intensity, nichtshe, and the national attitudes, Charco, Fert. Let's also recall that Verborg, in order to explicate the Patos Formel in terms of superlatives of the language of gestures, Utilizai utilized as an anthropological argument the analogy with this famous separation function, functionality, in the Indo-European languages studied by the linguist Hermann Ostov. Doesn't the intensification of bonus into malia and intensification of malia into optimus, so three different radicals, suppose a change in the linguistic route, therefore the graceful serving girl with the light footstep, who is unexpectedly invited into the iconography of John the Baptist, would thus be fundamentally deresiné, deresinéted, a strange woman, a stranger, an extraterritorial, no green card. And, tropologically speaking, the serving girls anonymity reminds us of one of Abbivabog's first intuition when reading the work of Edward B. Tyler concerning the survival observed in Mexico around 1860. He understood that the survival only appeared contrary to the assumed traditions as transversal symptoms, phenomena that were unfit to use Tyler's own expression, unfit. That is to say, in adapted, obsolete, and congruence, ephemeral, andachronistic. Thus, in 1895 and six, when Abbivog visited the Indians of New Mexico, he would be interested in impersonal rituals and animals persons, stubborn symptoms like that pueblo woman on the right, that he photographed at the moment that she promptly regained the back hole of her quarters, fleeing the eye of the black chamber of the camera, or fleeing the reach of the occidental logos. The figures and the paradigm of the NINFA helps us finally to better understand where the history of images must find it's a fictitious end to appear and act as a knowledge that is a repeat against transversal to those disciplines constituted in the social sciences. Now the question is in you for me, the neurology, the psychology, but in the social sciences, according to the limits of more or less defined territories, in photographing himself a lady, peasant lady, in Setiniano here. Abbivog made evident the temporal transversality of his concept of naphleban, setting an image of a Gulf Star between coins of antiquity and representations of Medea. He also made evident the social transversality of his notion of Patos Formel, but chiefly he made evident the critical and finally in the last plates of Nemozune, political dimension of this transversal, especially when he spoke about Geistes' politics, for example, which remain inherent of all his analysis, which remain agonistic, generally pessimistic, confronted as they were to the point of madness with the devastations of the First World War to in general the tragedy of Western culture, which is an expression he used, as well as Gerzimel, for example. Perhaps we should read the Vibogian transversals today in the light of Michel Foucault's writing in which eccentric knowledges fall under the term heterotopias, all of Gildolous and Felix Guattari, and come back to Duluth, because we learn in 1,000 Plato this, which is a major point that nomadic knowledge, nomadic knowledges, however dismissively, they are ranked, however light are the footsteps, can act in spite of everything, like a real what Duluth says is a machine of war against the territorial instruments of royal sciences, so to speak, always monasté, monast, by their self-sufficient, thank you. Thank you. Thank you.