Thank you. I'm Rob Penzer. I'm the Associate Director of the Helix Center. Welcome on this
beautiful day. I apologize that we may have had some email problems that resulted in
more people not getting notified of this, but we will proceed. Just a few announcements
on Saturday, May 17th from 2.30 to 4.30. Join us and economist Graciela Chichliniiski,
Marie Marit de Lozier, Business School Professor Nancy DiTomasso, Internester Rumbin, and Women's
Advocate Patricia Taylor for Women and the Work World. On Saturday, June 14th from 2.30
to 3.30, under the guidance of the Helix Center's Poetry Group Director David Pollins, we inaugurate
the responses series in which poets read aloud each other's poetry and comment on those poems
they've selected. We're fortunate to have two marvelous poets as our inaugurators, Patrick
Rosal and Jean Valentine. Finally, the Helix Center benefit will be held on June 1st at
Ginny's Supper Club of Red Rooster Harlem. Please support our mission. We provide these
programs free of charge, but we need your support. And join us for Chef Marcus Samuelson's
Cuisine, a wine tasting guided by renowned French salme de Jean-Luc Lidoux, Magic by
Mark Mitten, and Music and Dancing. And for ticket information, you can inquire at our
email address, thehelixcenter, at gmail.com. So now on to today's program, Women and Science.
Our participants are, if you can raise your hand, Priya Natarajan's research is focused
on exotica in the universe, dark matter, dark energy, and black holes. She is noted for
her key contributions to two of the most challenging problems in cosmology, mapping the distribution
of dark matter and tracing the growth history of black holes. Her work using gravitational
lensing has provided a deeper understanding of the granularity of dark matter in clusters
of galaxies and offers a novel way to unravel the nature of dark matter. She also works on
the assembly and accretion history of black holes. Deeply invested in the public dissemination
of science, she serves on the advisory board of Nova Science Now and is a fervent proponent
of numerical literacy. She is also a published poet. A professor in the departments of astronomy
and physics at Yale University, Priya is a strong supporter of gender equity in the workplace
and was on the chair of the women's faculty form at Yale from 2011 to 2013. She also serves
on the foundation board of the EDGE certification foundation based in Switzerland. She also holds
the Sophie and Tycho Bra professorship at the dark center, Niels Bohr Institute in Copenhagen
and an honorary professorship at the University of Delhi. She has undergraduate degrees in
physics and mathematics from MIT. She is also interested in the history and philosophy of
science as well as technology and public policy and was enrolled in the MIT program in science,
technology and society where she was awarded a master's degree and the MIT program in
technology and public policy. She did her graduate work in theoretical astrophysics at the Institute
of Astronomy University of Cambridge in gangland where she was a member of Trinity College and
was elected to a title, a research fellowship. She was the first woman in astrophysics to
be elected a fellow of Trinity College Cambridge. Next to her, Tal Rabin is the manager and
research staff member of the cryptography research group at IBM's T.J. Watson research center.
Her research focuses on the general area of cryptography and more specifically on secure
multi-party computation, threshold cryptography and proactive security which the National
Research Council cyber security report to Congress identified as quote, exactly the right
primitives for building distributed systems that are more secure unquote. She obtained
her PhD in computer science from the Hebrew University in 1994 and was an NSF postdoc
fellow at MIT between 1994 and 1996. Following her postdoc she joined the cryptography group
in IBM research in 1996 and started managing it in 1997, excuse me. She has served as the
program and general chair in leading cryptography conferences and is an editor of the journal
of cryptology. She is a member of the SIGACT executive board, serves as a council member
of the computing community consortium and is on the membership committee of the AWM,
the association of women in mathematics. She has initiated and organizes the women in theory
workshop a biennial event for graduate students in theory of computer science. She has appeared
in the New York Times and World Science Festival and on WNYC's NPR science fair. Next to her
is Anna Ziegler. Her plays have been produced at Seattle Repertory Theater, Cincinnati Playhouse
in the park, the magic theater, ensemble studio theater, new Georges, theater J, DR2, Cherry
Lane theater, the playwrights realm, Brown trinity playwrights repertory theater, summer
play festival, the fountain theater, English theater Berlin, theater 503 in the United
Kingdom, synchronicity theater, Jewish ensemble theater and Vermont stage company, among others.
She has received commissions from the Manhattan theater club, ensemble studio theater, Virginia
stage company and new Georges. Awards include the stage award, Weisberger award finalist,
Ed Duchten new play prize, Douglas T. Ward playwriting prize and the NYIT award nomination
for best short play in 2011 and 2012. She has participated in residencies and workshops
at the Sundance Theater Lab, O'Neill playwrights conference, Williamstown theater festival, Cape
Cod theater project, arena stage, play labs, Chautauqua theater company, Soho rep writer,
director lab and theater works new works festival. I'm going to have to get bigger print after
this. Sorry, right workshop, Mcarter playwright retreat, Rattlestick playwrights theater,
the Araca group, old vick new voices, Terranova ground breakers playwrights group, Orchard
project, Arz Nova, Berkshire playwrights lab, primary stages and others. Publications include
new playwrights, the best plays of 2007 and DPS editions of BFF, life science and photograph
51, which many of you may also be familiar with. Film credits include a screenplay adaptation
of photograph 51 funded by a Tribeca Film Institute slash Sloan Foundation grant. She
received the BA from Yale and an MFA from NYU Tisch School of the Arts.
To her right, Liz Phelps received her PhD from Princeton University in 1989, served on the
faculty of Yale University until 1999, and is currently the Julius Silver Professor of
Psychology and Neuroscience at New York University. Her lab has earned widespread acclaim for
its groundbreaking research on how the human brain processes emotion, particularly as it
relates to learning, memory and decision making. Dr. Phelps is the recipient of the 21st century
scientist award from the James S. McDonald Foundation and a fellow of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. She has served
on the board of directors of the Association for Psychological Science and the Society for
Neuroethics, was the president of the Society for Neuroeconomics and has served as the editor
of the journal Emotion. She is the current president for the Association for Psychological
Science. And next to her, Christina Alberini, professor in the Center for Neuroscience
at New York University, who has been studying the biological mechanisms of long-term memory
for the last 20 years. Her studies explore the biological mechanisms of memory consolidation
and re-consolidation, the processes by which newly learned information become long-lasting
memories and how memories are modulated and integrated into complex behavioral manifestations
respectively. Her studies also aim at utilizing the basic understandings of the mechanisms
of memory formation to enhance memories and prevent forgetting or disrupt pathogenic
memories. Both approaches have important translational applications. She graduated from the University
of Pavia in Italy with honors and obtained a doctorate in research and immunological sciences
from the University of Genoa. She trained as a postdoctoral fellow at Columbia University
studying the role of gene expression regulation during long-term synaptic plasticity consolidation
in Applijia, California. From 1997 to 2000, she served on the faculty of Brown University
before joining Mount Sinai in 2001, where she worked until 2011 when she joined the Center
for Neuroscience at NYU. She has received several awards, including the Hershweil Career Scientist
Award, Narsad Independent Investigator Award, McKnight Memory and Cognitive Disorder Award,
Mount Sinai Dean's Award for Excellence in Basic Science Research, Paul Harris Fellow,
Rotary Club, Ramona and NIMH Merrick Award. Since 2004, she has been a member of the Council
of the Molecular and Cellular Cognition Society and served as a society's treasurer from 2006
to 2009 and then as president from 2009 to 2012. So those are the introductions and we
now open the discussion to our participants. Thank you for the introduction. That was a
lot. Yeah, thanks for coming in through the introduction. Okay, I can start. It looks
like it's too. It's a little awkward. Go ahead. So I've been thinking recently about all
these issues of women in science because I have to give some speech in a week about
this issue and I was supposed to give some inspiring talk. So I had thought a little bit
about my history and how I got here and how women surrounded me during my studies and
I ended up telling us, I will be telling a story of how when I was doing my PhD in Jerusalem,
we were a gang of women. We were all together. We were like four or five women doing our
PhD and I was even trying to think whether there were men there or not but I can't remember
but I remember these four or five women. Four or five women and we were together and we
really helped each other throughout our studies and so on. And then towards the end of my
PhD, I went to a conference in San Diego and there I saw another bunch like that. At the
same time at Berkeley, there was also a group of four or five women doing a PhD in theoretical
computer science. So there was the one in Jerusalem and the one in Berkeley and it was
wonderful to see. And then we graduated from our studies and all of us got fantastic jobs
and research institutions and universities, really fantastic jobs. And then I was young
and maybe a little bit foolish and I thought yes, you know, we women we can succeed on
our merit all by ourselves without anybody helping us and if you're good, you'll definitely
get a good job and so on. But it's time elapsed. I really realized that we succeeded in some
way because we had each other and we were helping each other throughout that time in
a way that we saw other women that were doing it and we're getting through it. The Israeli
ones of course, we all had kids, unlike the American ones, we were simply much older than
our counterparts in the US. But we went through it and we saw, okay, even if you have a child,
even if you're pregnant, you can still get through it, you can still travel and we were
really a huge support group. And somehow I feel that I see in percentages, we succeeded
much more than the average woman succeeds who's doing a graduate studies in computer
science and theoretical computer science and getting work. So I realized that somehow
over the time that we need each other and it's somehow for women it's harder and if
they're missing the support group, we succeed less. This was something that I had thought.
I don't know what your experiences were but I had felt that I had misattributed our success
just to our talent and not realized that there really was also a component of the support
group that we got. And many the support group a little bit less. Also in theoretical computer
science, the whole world is a support group because they're all men. There's so few women,
women in theoretical computer science are tops 10%. But I felt that it really helped
me and now I appreciate it.
I think one of the things that I find these days, if I'm on a board or something like
that, I'm almost always the only woman in the room. And when, especially if I'm on an
advisory board, I always point out that I'm the only woman in the room and that's a problem.
And then the answer I always get is, yeah I know there just aren't that many senior
women, you know, discipline. But the good news is, you know, half of our graduate students
are women, half of our postdocs are women. But then I always say, well you know when
I was a graduate student, half the graduate students were women and half the postdocs
were women and now I'm the only woman in the room. And so I think it is the case that
we're training a lot of women these days. But you know, talking about support groups,
you know, maybe you have it at that level but not everybody is getting the same opportunities
going up and being asked through the same thing. I imagine in your discipline you get
that a lot. I realized that I often don't even notice that the other woman in the room.
Because I'm so used to the idea of what normalcy is. But you know thinking about sort of issues,
I think there's sort of two things, right? There's the demographics and then there's
the culture. I think the issue with the demographics is worrisome. They're interrelated of course.
And I think for about if you look at the data for about 30 odd years in many disciplines,
not mine but in a lot of disciplines, especially in the biological sciences for example, you've
had about 50-50 through this sort of metaphorical pipeline, right? But it's progress up the pipeline
that seems to be really problematic. And that's where culture intervenes. And it's culture
with big C, right? I mean, it's our communities, our professional communities, culture, nurturing
talent support groups, mentoring versus sponsoring, all of that. And then culture with a big C,
which is the outside world and stereotyping and expectations and all of that. I think
that has changed. There has been progress. But I think it's just too slow. It's just
been too slow. And I think one of the problems has been that I think a lot of the debate
has gotten mired in the issue of whether women are capable of doing cutting-edge science
or mathematics or abstraction. I think that's a completely pointless debate because what
we do know is that our own sense of sort of stereotyping and expectations that culture
offers bigger impediments that we're fully aware of. And we now know from all these wonderful
studies, and there was a study by colleagues of mine last year, which was really quite
disturbing, amazing and disturbing at the same time. This is a study by Maastra Kussin
and Joe Handelsman, which showed that both men and women are biased. So if you look at
a resume with a male name and a female name circulated to people looking to hire biology
lab assistants, we're not talking of faculty. We're not talking of this is a summer job.
And it's clear that both men and women faculty were biased against young women and were biased
against not just hiring them, but offering the male candidate a higher salary, but also
not wanting. The thing that was most disturbing for me was the fact that they were less likely
to mentor the young women, want to mentor the younger women, so help them improve their
resumes so that they could do better next year. So I think that the fact that culture
intervenes in this very huge fashion, I think it's much more constructive to talk about
that, then to get admired in, you know, are we hardwired and can women do this or not do
that? I just think that's not a very constructive debate. But you know, I leave it to those
of you studying psychology and the brain to...
Well, what's interesting about that Joe Handelman study was that that was a replication of about
50 experiments that had been done previously. The only difference between the studies you
did and one that, you know, someone like Madeleine Holleman, who's at NYU has done over the years,
is that they asked scientists. Right. You know, as if scientists think they were immune.
It's because they're objective. Right. Standard and implicit bias, right? You know.
No, they're objective. Yeah. Yeah. The economists are the worst actually.
They're better and I have three towers. Right. And it got a lot... I mean, I'm glad it got a
lot of attention because it's an important issue, but it's an old finding. Yeah. You know,
that now we've just replicated with scientists. Absolutely. That, you know, we have these very
subtle implicit biases that... And, you know, no one's immune to them because we all grew up
in the same culture, whether you're male or female. You know, it's not like I grew up in a
culture where all the scientists were women, you know. You know, you're not immune to those
things regardless of who you are. By the way, the point that I found shocking, the point
with the mentoring I agree with you, that was really horrifying because that's stepping stone
towards other thing. And I'll mention another research that I thought that related to that.
But the fact that the women were the same as the men. That... Why wasn't shocking to me though?
I always hope that... And by the way, there was just a... I heard an NPR and other research
done recently, not just about gender, but also about race. That black faculty are not more
responsive to black students and so on. So it's across the board. It's not just that women are
failing. But with the mentoring issue, in the past, there was a research which I saw which I thought
somehow related to this point that they did a statistical examination of how many
papers women have in science and in nature. And their percent of the papers was much lower
than their percent in the population. Okay, so let's accept that their percent is 20%, but at
least little that they have 20% of the publications in these leading magazines, but journals.
But this was not the case either. Their percent were lower. And I was trying to give all kinds
of explanations of why this happened. But I always felt that the reason was that when the woman comes
to the advisor to start discussing what problems are possible, what she could work on and so on,
the advisor will never give her the problem that has the potential of being a nature or science
article. That they even aim lower when they're giving them the research. And because that,
they can never go as far. It's hard for me to say because I'm not in these areas. So this was just
my assumption. In my area, it's slightly different. You also have to go and find your own problems.
So you can't blame the advisor. But I think that when it's a lab issue, it's much more that the
advisor hands the problem and that that even is not done in even keel that the women will not be
offered the better problems to work on. Is that the New York, I think it was a New York Times
article, maybe at Yale as well. That's right. This was so long ago that I don't remember the detail.
It was about an undergrad at Yale. Yes, essentially. A woman who was dissuaded.
This was recently, I read that one, but what I'm telling you is something that I heard maybe 10
years ago about research in the beginning of the 2000s. But there are these studies that also show
from, I think it was one of the Nordic countries, probably Sweden, where even funding
there's gender bias in who gets funded. If you look at, and this was a medicine,
that women tend to be less successful in a systematic fashion. And who gets it? Controlling
for everything else. And you get invited to write inventories in science and nature. So after,
one second, I just want to say, after the summer thing, then at MIT, they put a commission in place,
which I forgot the name of the woman who added it. Nancy Hopkins. Right. And there she even found
that women have less lab space. That everything is constrained for women. And of course, you have
less lab space. You can have less students. You can do less research. It's continuous.
Well, the nice thing about the MIT report, I think that was before summer, they were complaining
for years and years and years. And to MIT's credit, they finally did what any good science
institution should do. They got the data. I mean, it took years and years and years of women's
scientists at MIT complaining. With this kind of subjective thing that you always hear,
this person gets a little bit more because they got this article and you only had that article.
But of course, we all know the way these things work. If the genders were switched,
it would have been, well, they got that article and you only had that.
By shifting sense. Exactly. And so I thought they were actually very brave because they got the
data and they published it. And they acknowledged it. And they didn't just acknowledge it among
themselves. I was president of the women's faculty at caucus at NYU for a while. And we also got a
gender equity committee together that did the same types of things. But NYU is not putting their
dirty laundry for everybody to read on the web the way that MIT did. Which I kind of think was
great. It provided some support for, I mean, those women suffered for a long time. And that was
obviously horrible. But the fact that MIT got the data, acknowledged they were wrong,
and acknowledged the dean, if you read that report, acknowledged that this was sort of unconscious
and unknowing. Which is really where the issues are these days. I mean, I think most people have
good intentions. It's just sort of how they act in ways that maybe is not what they really intend
and they aren't even aware of. But I think one thing I have is someone like Christina nearby,
you know, as a colleague. So we always are talking to each other about these little things that
happen. And that's where I find my women colleagues come in handy today because they're like, I
know exactly what you're talking about. I agree with you that this is the best thing. And
unfortunately, not all of us have it. As I say, I can go for a month at work without speaking to
a woman because they're just not around. And it's a problem. And because also I feel,
I have a very close friend in my group, but he's a guy. And I feel that when I do eventually meet
with my friend who is, she's in another group and the conversation is different. I can discuss
the issues with him sometimes. But we speak on it about it on a different level when I speak to her.
There's something about our joint experience that makes her advice different. And you're lucky.
No, I am. I'm very lucky to have colleagues like Christina, you have a friend down the hall
who's Layla, but you know, named Layla. But it's the same thing. Like, if I didn't have somebody
that sort of every once in a while who totally gets what it's like to be a woman in science,
and I could go to. And I think that would be a great question.
I think one of, so for example at Yale, we have this group called the Women's Faculty Forum.
And that's been absolutely fantastic because it's interdisciplinary. It's cross-disciplinary.
It's basically all the senior women from across. And I think I second your point about the data.
So every five years we publish a data of the view of men and women at Yale. It is public.
We make a little less noise about it. But it's sort of guidance to our community and it's helped
set the aspirations for the university. And I said, that is progress, but it is slow.
And I think we cannot underestimate the power of women getting together in institutions,
across levels, across seniority in trying to change.
I agree with that, but I also want to point out to something in addition to that.
It's great to have colleagues to go and talk to. It's great to have support.
But that's not enough. Things are not changing actually. Changing much too slow.
And so how do we promote changes a little faster? I mean, for me it was a wake-up call actually,
looking at the data from MIT, which I met by chance. I was a brown at that time,
assistant professor, so a young faculty. And the colleague, a man, was supposed to go to the NIH
to one of these meetings where they were discussing about women and minorities.
And he couldn't go. And so he said, could you please go?
I can go. I will tell them that you go instead of me. So I went.
And it was not really my choice. And I was like, oh no, why are they sending me to these
things? It's going to be a waste of time. Because I want to put my time into my work,
rather than I go there. And I see this report and I was shocked.
50% women and men are the graduate student level. And post-doc about that.
But then when they start to go into professional career, a system professor,
you start to cut down in half. 25% a system professor. About 12% associate professor,
women, compared to me. About less than 10% food professors. So this was 10 years ago, 12 years
ago. How much did we change from there? If I look at our department, same.
It's a problem. When I was at Yale, I was the junior faculty member in psychology. Peter
salivate was one of my colleagues. And this was before Peter got tenure.
When I first got there, he got tenure while I was there.
There were no senior women on the faculty. And then half of the junior faculty were women.
And we're sitting in the room someday. And we bring this up. And they say, one of our senior
colleagues said, well, we'd love to hire a good woman faculty. We just can't find any good women.
And of course, half the junior women are sitting there in the room.
And one of the things, you see this drop off, and it often gets blamed on women having children
and things like that. But you also have to understand the stuff we put up with.
The kinds of little tiny insults we get on a daily basis. The microaggressions.
It adds up. And if you put men in the same situation, I think more of them would leave as well.
It's not the case that there aren't family issues and stuff, because women tend to have
less support for those types of things as well. But it's also the case that
these things do get to you unless you're unbelievably confident. And confidence is something that
often is lacking in young women scientists. There's some beautiful work by a woman named
Bourgeois Gupta, who's shown that if you, women who are in women colleges with more women
professors in STEM disciplines have much more sense of self-efficacy, they actually do better
than the male students. But how well they feel they're doing, whether they think they could have
a career in it, whether they think they're capable of doing it, has a lot to do with whether they
have female professors. So it's not just the case of you need women to, you have to be confident
yourself. That actually comes from the environment that we create, which is another reason to really
think seriously about who we're putting out there as your examples of women. But Peter is an
interesting case, because Peter's a social psychologist or a clinical... I think this was a time when
Mazarid was there... Mazarid and my old friends, yeah, we collaborate. But he knows this world well.
So he's in an interesting situation to be a university president who really knows about
implicit bias and the subtle effects and these subtle environments that you create that make
it easier or not so easy for women to promote. We're very hopeful that now that he's at the
helm, that the pace of institutional change is going to be much more rapid.
I want to say two points about this thing. So first of all, I agree with you that discussion,
whether we can do science or not, is not that important. But I'm one person that I don't think
that women and men are the same. I do think we're different. And don't start asking me how I think
we're different, because it's slightly unimportant, but on the confidence issue. I think there's no
question about it. If you look at averages, women are not as confident as men are. I hear my colleagues
speaking at conferences about their work. I would never use the superlatives that they use. About
their own work, I would never use it about my work. I even once had an incident that some guy was
talking about his work. He still didn't mention what it was. And I was thinking, what work does he
have that satisfy these descriptions? Turned out it was a joint paper. But I would have never used
these things. So I think that we do lack in our capabilities of self-promotion. I think it's a
little bit of how we are and what we are. And I think if I look around at one of my women colleagues,
they definitely are above the curve in their confidence and so on. So in order to survive in
this world, there is unfortunately a selection happening based on personality. And I'm sure that
we're losing great scientists in the process. But I don't know its personality. I think it's
the environment we create. I mean, if you're an undergraduate and you're just trying to figure
out, am I any good at this? And all you see are men. And you don't identify with any of them,
and you're not getting the extra support. I mean, I think that is her environment and
not just her personality. I agree that the question of role models is huge. That's not an issue. And I
think that for example, in computer science, we need to pass some hurdle and we'll have like a
slightly exponential growth for a slow time. It won't bring us to high percents. But I think
if we have a bit more, there are women who don't see female professors at all due to the presence
in the universities. I agree with that. But I still think when I'm looking at the women who have
survived, a person like me, I would definitely say that I do not lack in confidence. Okay? And
anybody who knows me would say that as well. But I have to tell you that I'm not like the guys.
I see it even on these little things. You know, each of them, they think that they're the best.
I don't think that I'm the best. I think that there are people around me who are very, very
talented. But these guys, if you ask their inner inner self, they think they're the best.
But they think it. We don't know. I've had a few say it. So I've had a few say it. So I definitely
think that. So that is one point that I wanted to touch about. I want to go back to your point
about change. And how do we bring it about? And I am a person that I believe that we need to take
active measures to improve these things. And it's a two-edged sword. I don't think that it's a
great solution. But I think we don't have another solution. I think that things that
things actively need to be awarded to women. And not for a second do I think that we'll be lowering
the quality. I think we'll be fixing for the biases that the people who are awarding the things have.
Because all these things like that. But you know, before we go there, I think a more radical way
to do that is just to shift the idea within our communities of who are successful scientists.
So I believe that it might be more fruitful for us women to not buy into this sort of
male notion of success. The male notion of the presentation of the self, all this self-promotion
whatever. Break, you know, make a break and say well there are different ways to be outstanding
scientists. You don't have to talk yourself up all the time. And I think that shift in culture
will be much more, will have more staying power. I agree with you as an end goal. But I don't agree
in the order because I think that our percent are too low to impact to say this is what a successful
scientist is. I think we first have to increase our numbers a little bit. And then we can start
and change the culture to say look this is also success. This is also good. But to raise the number,
I think the thing, I think you need to do both at the same time. You can't wait for the demographics.
I agree. It has to be hand in hand. But I think that at this point people are a little bit hesitant
about saying the NIH is giving funding. There's 30 percent of women, they need to get 30 percent
of the funding. I'm sure they're getting below their percent. Just to actively say that because then
the other people will say she got it because she's a woman. She didn't get it based on merit. But I
say who cares? I have to tell you. I was on, I organized this workshop of Women in Theory,
which was meant in the introduction. And in this workshop I always have a panel. The workshop is
for graduate students and all the speakers are faculty. And the women love this panel. They eat
the stuff that the women say, the advanced women in their career. And I invited a professor from MIT,
Nancy Lynch. For me, Nancy Lynch was one of the women, one of my role models. She was their already
superstar, amazing research, breakthrough results. She's like, and then she sits on this panel.
And she starts telling her story. Turns out she was a female hire at MIT. Nobody today would think
of her as a female hire. And she had said, you know, take these opportunities. Who cares how they
arrived? And make the most of it. And shortly after, people will forget that this was a female hire.
Just prove yourself and do the work that needs to be done. And that's what I'm saying. You know,
let's get the money. Let's get the positions based on these. I don't want to call them affirmative
actions because I don't think they're affirmative. Correcting actions because it's just to fix
where the bias is. And let's make the most of them. And we, the women who are here currently,
we're like the generation walked through the desert. You know, we're going to suffer. But for a better
cause, it will be said that we got things that we didn't deserve. Can I just say, I mean, it's,
you know, irrespective of that situation, I need to go back and do that. It's not,
women are not necessarily always women's advocates. I mean, all of the literature suggests that women
are equally gender-based. I agree. You know, and I think you really need to pay attention to that.
I mean, you know, one of the things is they think if they're going to fix this situation by getting
a woman on the search committee, that makes no difference whatsoever. And it just makes all of
your women do extra committee work. You know, I mean, that's a classic thing of a woman,
faculty members want every committee. And we can't get our work done because we're actually always
doing service. And the service gets dumped on us. But I didn't say to put us on committees, I said
to give us the amount of research. What I'm saying is bringing women, like promoting women more
through is not going to change if you don't change the culture. I have not been having a woman that has not been handed hand, but what I'm saying, back to your point of role models.
Of role models, if you get, if in computer science, there'd be more than 10%, then the young students coming in through the pipeline to go have the role models.
So I'm saying that's why I said we're the generation of the desert. We will be the ones who will get things and it'll be said that we didn't get them from merit.
But the minute that there's enough women, it'll impact the younger females and they'll stay on.
I'd just like to interject one thing. I think it's a great relevance.
Rosalne Franklin's experience, speaking of, you know, a previous generation, I'm wondering, you know, from her perspective as a non-scientist and having a deep knowledge of her experiences, how that might
expand the discussion.
Yeah, I mean, it's been really interesting for me to sit here and listen to everyone.
Because I'm not a scientist and I'll say two things very carefully.
Is that my mic, I guess?
And one is that, I mean, just coming from a theatre perspective, and I know we're not here to talk about theatre, but I'm going to play right, and we're having all the same conversations in theatre.
And it's really discouraging, I think, to, I mean, I'm not surprised that the same conversations are happening in the science world, but I guess what I find most discouraging to hear is just that everyone,
knows about these biases, and just knowledge of them doesn't do anything apparently.
That's right.
That's certainly true.
In theatre too, there have been all these studies that suggest that female artistic directors who run theatres are not any more likely to program women's plays, for instance.
And there are just as many women, if not more, writing plays right now.
There are more women in graduate school, and 13%, I think, of plays produced around the country are plays written by women.
So, I mean, the numbers are very stark as well.
And I think that your questions about sort of what should come first are certainly the questions, but I don't think at least in theatre, and it sounds like in the science world too.
There might not be enough enthusiasm to really make those changes because there's so many factors at that play, and you just don't know how to unravel them.
But as far as Rosalind Franklin is concerned, I mean, I think when I was writing that play, and I'm not a scientist, I assumed that I was writing a piece of history, and that the landscape in 1953 was radically different.
Then the advanced landscape in the science world for women today.
And of course, I mean, it comes as no surprise to anyone here, but to me, the response to the play was shocking, has been shocking.
It's been done all around the country, and most...
So, why are you shocked?
Well, I mean, I was initially, I'm certainly not, I certainly not, no more.
That women would say, oh, the challenges are really still the same as they were over 50 years ago.
And I would say largely sort of older women scientists mostly espouse that view.
It seemed like younger women scientists for the most part were more optimistic.
I don't know if that's something that you guys find, but it does seem like a shame that a lot of the legacy of trailblazers,
you know, over 50 years ago, it's all, it's just not changing fast enough, and that's...
It just seems to be true across every field.
That's what's so discouraging.
I think I have to say that things have improved since the, it's the work of the previous generation that has made my walk down the corridor somewhat easier,
and that, you know, that has to be acknowledged.
There has been some progress, very hard-earned, but again, you know, insufficient.
The Nancy Hopkins.
Yeah, yeah.
I have to say about your point that maybe people were a little older feel differently.
I was being interviewed for the New York Times, and I was 10 years younger than the other women researchers.
It was Jill from Columbia, I forgot her name, and Marie King from, she's a biologist from Washington.
Never mind.
Anyway, they were all an April...
Helena Priya.
Helena Priya from, but they're all like 10 years older than me.
And we were all discussing, and then I was the most optimistic in some sense.
The interview ended.
They started screaming at me.
How dare you say that?
It was like, and I was thinking, how can it be that even the sense...
And I was saying that it was hard.
I didn't say that it was easy, but I felt that they, they felt that for me, it was easier,
and that I was trying to make a light of how hard it was, but I wasn't.
I did say it was hard, but there was a measurable difference between how they clearly felt it and I felt it.
So I guess 10 years did make a difference, and I hope that we're making a difference for women who are a bit younger.
I don't know, but hopefully things are improving too slow.
But I think that there is a point to be made about this larger culture scene.
So I did my schooling in India, but I came here as an undergraduate, as a young undergraduate.
And it has to be said, from my understanding of American culture now, compared to my experience growing up,
when I was growing up in India, there was absolutely no taboo about girls' contour science or math.
This was before the pre-Barbie times.
And actually, the cooler kids in school did the harder stuff, and that's how you became cool.
I mean, because you were doing challenging things.
And that is very different.
Having taught students here now, as a faculty member and an American now,
not having gone through the school experience here, however,
I noticed that there is a huge component that is pertinent to when girl kids and boy kids are in school and come through high school.
There's something about this particular version of stereotyping of scientists and mathematicians,
this whole sort of cool versus nerds thing that gets started and gets reinforced very early, very early.
So we're actually losing a lot of, it's another matter that once you make it and you get to have a PhD and so on,
the point is we're losing a huge amount of talent beforehand.
So why do you think that this issue affects the girls more than it affects the guys, the social issues that you're talking about or relevant to the guys?
It affects the guys in the sense that the ways in which it affects the guys is that this image of the need to be successful,
the need to be the breadwinner, to sort of, they have very different pressures.
The pressures that operate on the women are pertinent to their dropping out from science and math.
And for young boys and men, it is about success in the world.
Steere typing of how it is that they get to be successful in the world.
So there are pressures for both genders.
But I think pertinent to our conversation now is the fact that a lot of girl kids feel very discouraged
and drop out of science and math in this country early on.
And I think that is what I find quite sad because it can be reversed.
And often it comes back to some of the questions we were talking about, which is really how we view success and failure.
And I've noticed this in my teaching.
I'm collecting the data for the last seven years or so, which is our perception of how successful we are.
So I have, I give out a survey before I do a test.
And it's just quoted by gender and it's anonymous otherwise.
And I ask them, how do you think you're going to do on this exam?
And then I look at the distribution afterwards.
And it's quite skewed.
If you look by gender, the guy kids always think they're going to do better than they actually did.
And the girl kids actually do better than they thought.
This goes exactly back to the other side.
The confidence of how you think that your work is, that's what I said.
The guys always think that they're great.
And I don't want to say about the rest of you.
I don't think I'm the smartest.
Right.
But you know, I think it's the response that's more interesting.
So it will always be, the girl students will come to my office when they don't do well on a test and say,
well, professor, I really don't think I can have this material.
And do you think I should drop the class?
And the male students, not surprisingly, will always say, well, you know, your test was too hard.
You didn't quite cover what you did in class on the test, et cetera, et cetera, you know, the usual stuff.
So I think there is something that gets shaped much earlier about success, failure, confidence, kind of, you know.
But I think it's something that happens well before you're standing on a podium
and giving an invited talk in front of, you know, the American Astronomical Society.
It's just, you know, the, so I think the problem, the solutions have to start at every stage,
right from, you know, infancy for expectations of, you know, when you have like a girl child versus a boy child.
I see a lot of my friends who are parents and, you know, just the subtle ways in which the expectations are different
and how they get loaded on to kids.
And then through the school system, you know, and the teaching of mathematics and sciences as well.
So I think the problem is very complex and I personally think that there isn't a sequence.
I think we have to solve it at every stage and that's when it's kind of finally kind of,
I think you know, come together.
I'm the president of the Association of Psychological Science.
You know, one of the things that I'm trying to do as president is society.
I mean, we are the society of scientists that study bias, you know, and produce the science on bias.
And interestingly, we haven't been evaluating ourselves, you know.
So that's, you know, that's actually been my one initiative because you're only president for a year.
About what you can do is actually just start to get the numbers much like MIT did.
But I think one of the challenges we have as a science who studies these things is, you know,
we've been very good at documenting.
We've been very good at documenting implicit bias, the type of studies that, you know,
Joe Handelman did, which have been done in lots of other contexts.
And we haven't been good at coming up with solutions, you know.
And I think that's actually a fault of our science is that, you know, we can't, I mean,
documenting is obviously the first stage of anything and knowing what the problems are and knowing where the, you know,
where the issues are.
And I agree it's at every level and you sort of need to decide which level you're going to work on.
But I mean, we also should as a science be able to produce some great recommendations.
And we haven't done a very good job.
And the one recommendation that has come out of all of these resume studies, which isn't usually used,
is to decide your criteria for hiring before you even look at an application.
Because what happens is your criteria shift depending on whether it's a male, resume, or a female resume.
All right.
So decide your, you know, have real criteria for promotion and real criteria for, you know,
for hiring, like what you're looking for in this position before you ever look at an application or before you even
have the information to evaluate anybody.
And that seems to reduce somewhat this bias.
I mean, nobody follows that.
But having said that, you know, we haven't gotten a lot of other good ideas that the science would say really works.
And I think that's a fault of our science is figuring out, you know, we're all sort of, you know,
conjecturing on how we're supposed to fix this. And the truth is the psychological, you know, the study of psychology,
the experimental study of psychology is the science to help answer those questions and we haven't done that.
So about the solutions, I didn't really mean to say that we should prioritize and so on.
The truth is that what I believe in, that we have to shoot in all directions.
Exactly.
I think you may be able to give some good recommendations, but I think that we really don't understand completely
the source of the problems and what's driving anything.
And because of that, we should try as much as we can.
So I know that I, on my personal level, I try to do various things.
I go to schools to talk to students and I talk to women.
I mean, I go to elementary schools and high schools and I talk, I do this workshop.
In my hiring practices, I'm aware of these things.
So I always pay attention that I'll have a female summer student.
If I'm on a committee, I, things that I organize, I try to do that one of the speakers, at least out of the bunch,
will be a woman's, so I pay attention to these things.
And I think that maybe what we need to do is just to raise our level of attention and say,
everybody, don't wait for instructions.
Do locally, whatever you can do and try to improve.
And maybe that will cause somewhat of a change.
I just wanted to respond a little bit to, I mean, I think the work that's come out of psychology has been fascinating and fantastic.
The only thing I really worry about is that, you know, if ultimately, I'm worried that we maybe get a little paralyzed,
because if ultimately all of us are biased, then that's that, right?
But there are some very interesting solutions as you, I mean, interventions, little nudges, interventions that...
Well, even just being, I mean, probably one of the best interventions. It's just being aware that you're not immune.
That's right. You know, that you are not immune.
You know, I am a woman of science. I'm not immune to gender bias and science.
Right. Right. And knowing that, and individuals who are aware of the fact that these things are subtle,
they're based on a culture. It's not a personal, it's not about your beliefs. It's not about your morality.
It's based on the fact that you grew up, where these were your role models.
Right. You know, and these are the stereotypes you learned.
That's going to seep in in little ways that you aren't necessarily thinking about whoever you are.
And being aware of that actually changes your decisions.
So I think this is really, you know, so, you know, just even discussions now in search committees,
having them read about implicit bias, thinking about it as they're doing things.
You know, I've been in faculty hiring committees where they'll be like, well, you know, she hasn't published anything without her advisor.
How do we know it's her ideas? I'm like, I'm like, we don't hire anybody who doesn't publish with their advisor.
Ever. You know, why? You know, and I get calls saying with a male student, you know, did you have anything to do with that?
And then I get calls with a female student like, did she have anything to do with that?
You know, you get it all the time. You see it constantly.
But you know, if you're aware of it, you would never, when I point out to the NIH grad officer who asked me if I had anything to do with my own work,
how sexist that sounds, he's horrified. He realizes in a second.
But I mean, the point is that, you know, even if you're aware of it, I mean, it seems like you have to be persistent.
You do. You do. You do. You do. You do. You do. You do. You do. You do. You kind of just all of a sudden make that.
Every time you write a letter, think about it. Right. Think about the decisions that matter.
And I think just even having that, you know, in a search committee, a conversation or search committee before you start,
it does change people's thoughts about things. You know, just, it does make a difference.
And, but I think people have a hard time accepting the fact that they too are biased.
They may be biased, you know.
So on top of all these things, as I said, I think we should do everything. Everything that's mentioned should be done.
And of course, these things are very important. But I also think the decisions should be made that are just operational,
that you have no room for deviating. For example, with funding.
Any field that has 25% women, 25% of government grants are going to go to those women.
And then there's no room for deviation. They're going to have to choose a woman to give her the money.
And I think that these things will help, first of all, it will help because we'll have the money.
And then it'll also slowly enable these women are going to have students.
I found, by the way, that any guy who's ever worked with a woman has changed his perception, that these men, because if the woman was good,
they see it differently because there's nothing like a close-up example.
So you see that those men are better.
So a woman shall have a lap, she'll have more money, she'll have male students.
These guys will change their opinion of women. They will grow to be heads of departments and so on.
And they'll have a different, so it'll seep in some ways, just making sure that we get our fair share of the resources at any given time.
How do you persuade people to make that happen, I guess? I mean, it seems like the...
I mean, it's a loss, but who is less than a target for it.
Promoting them and enforcing them. I mean, it just seems like even the most progressive people in various fields want these things to happen,
but then don't actually enact any...
That's why they want the decision.
The decision is going to come from some governmental office.
We're having the NIH this month. For each field, here is the percent that goes to women.
I think part of the reason why this is not simple, definitely in academia,
and there may be similar things that operate in other creative fields, like yours on it,
is that there is this notion of a meritocracy and a shared understanding of what is excellence.
And I think that's the tension. The tension really is that if you do anything proactive,
you are doing it at the expense of a meritocracy and excellence, right?
No, I don't have to agree that we're going to be losing on the excellence.
I'm not saying we are losing. I think that's the fear for people.
It's a two-edged sword. And that's why I said, we're a generation that we will need to suffer,
and we're being told that we got it just because there was an allocation.
I can live with that. I have no problems. I do my research.
I'm happy with what it is. I'm confident about what it is.
And if this will make things better for the next generation, then I think we've gained something.
No, but I mean...
What you're saying is exactly you adhering to the definition of the guys, what they said.
I'm not saying... I'm just saying that that's the problem. This is not my opinion.
I'm just saying that the tension comes because the people who are currently in power
see that you are diluting excellence if you make an allowance for a proportional representation.
Okay, so you have to talk about my opinion.
Okay, so you're talking to these people who just make the decisions.
It's not when you're in the department, this is money coming from the guy's pocket
and going into the girls' pocket, and he's unhappy and he doesn't want to do it.
So you're talking about governmental administrations.
You come and you tell them, you're biased. You give them the whole discussion that she's saying.
And you show them that they're going to make these decisions in a wrong way.
And based on that, you say, and now you have to put the rule in place in order to prevent the bias
that women will get 30% of the funding if they're 30% of the field.
And then he'll be talking...
I think that he's not losing an exercise.
But that's the point. How do you convince all the men is the issue?
How do you make this a policy is where it's at?
I mean, this is a suggestion that I have.
I mean, I think complex, right?
As we have discussed, it's complex, but there are very simple things to do
that I don't even see in place, for example.
For example, in academia or in the institutions where things can be under control,
they could, are women paid less than men or equally?
Let's get the data. Let's change the numbers.
Are there more committees, less important committees?
Let's get the data. Let's change the numbers. This is easy.
It should have been done yesterday.
Let's hope it's going to be done tomorrow.
We have a number of numbers on those that are in the way.
I mean, they are being done that way.
And? Yeah, they're done.
I mean, when they first did this, there was a big discrepancy between,
and we have a gender equity report, there's a big discrepancy between pay.
And so the university over the years has tried to make sure that becomes less so.
Where the discrepancy is at NYU right now is a lot in the promotion rates.
And the time of promotion, everything like that can be passed through.
Exactly. For us, too, that's the challenge.
But that is the responsibility. Those are people we take this.
The problem with NYU in terms of just because I know the data at NYU,
there aren't enough women in science to get good numbers.
That's really the issue right now. So we have very good numbers for the humanities and things like that.
There just aren't enough women in science departments to have anything more than examples here and there,
so we can't actually do a full-on-out.
We don't have good systematics.
To look at things systematically.
So the numbers are too few in science to look at any systematic discrimination
where in other departments they were able to do this type of stuff.
But in science, the numbers are still so small that you can't pull out anything.
There are things that don't require a lot of numbers.
Sometimes I get into the stupidest bets with my friends.
I don't know when I'm... And then I just want to prove that point.
So we were discussing about salaries and about salaries of professors in history.
So I went, I looked for a top 10 public university, Berkeley, in history, top 10.
All the salaries, of course, are known.
I went and I checked the salary of every full professor in that department.
You see, I have a little bit of an OCD thing.
So anyway, I go and I look and I don't remember, first of all, I was shocked that people in history
could make $203,000, $303,000 a year. I was impressed.
Anyways.
So I start and I look at the salaries of all the people in this department
and what a wonder.
The bottom nine salaries had seven women and one woman had a salary higher than that.
And there were like about 30 people in the department.
And this has nothing to do with science.
This was just in the humanities.
So we know we're not doing well. That's not even a question.
Those things can be easily fixed.
You would think so I wrote to the women in the bottom seven.
And I asked them, can you explain to me what's going on here?
Is it an issue because you're less senior?
Because I don't know anything.
I took a list from the department.
I don't think they know. They probably don't know.
They can answer my emails.
They can answer my emails.
But I think a lot of institutions are trying.
Actually, in fact, I must admit.
Berkeley is an exemplar in many ways because it's a public university.
So they have a vice provost and an amazing woman Angie Stacey who's been looking at the
data and trying to equalize.
But I think part of the question in institutions like mine, for instance, is the lack of transparency
for some of this data.
And the reason I think this is important is that the same culture of lack of transparency
propagates to promotions in tenure.
So I think this whole, you know, we sort of touched upon this idea of shifting criteria
and what the real criteria are and how you evaluate people, the biases that sort of creep in there.
Those are even hard to quantify.
So because we don't actually have the statistics.
How many women are actually put up for tenure?
How many get it?
Don't get it?
Why?
Et cetera, et cetera.
So those are things that we should all definitely push within our institutions to learn and understand
and diagnose much, much better.
So recently I was involved with this Swiss foundation, this group called the Ed Strategy
Group, where they've been working so far on trying a very clever, cute idea in the corporate world.
So what they do is they look at, you know, they are devoted to pay equity, basically gender pay equity
for the same work.
And what they do is they look at institutions, corporations, and they look at survey, employee survey data
about, you know, how much they're getting paid, their satisfaction, whether they're supported, mentored, et cetera.
They look at the HR policies that are, you know, pertinent to that group.
And then they talk to the CEOs, people in the C-suite about, you know, how is it going, how are the promotions going.
And then they do a triangulation to look at the consistency.
I mean, is the perception of the employees in alignment with the policies?
And they find these huge gaps.
And, you know, sort of it's a real diagnosis for companies.
And so we recently got a grant from the Sloan Foundation to adapt this methodology for the university setting
and Yale ran the pilot.
And what was amazing about it, as, you know, at Yale, we've been collecting the data.
The women's faculty form has been collecting data for, you know, for about 14 years now.
So we understand what's going on in our universe, probably as best as most, you know, most of the well universities
that think a lot about these matters do.
And this one's pilot immediately sort of showed us, you know, pointed out what the problem is.
What the problems really are.
And what, you know, and especially in the promotion and retention of women.
The fact that there is a lack of transparency about expectations of what it takes to get promoted,
how the evaluation is done even once the expectations are laid out, and then what really happens.
I mean, there's a real gap and mismatch in this.
And these are the, I mean, these are the things we absolutely need to bridge within institutions, you know,
talking about what are the things that we can do.
And I think we all have to be pushing from within as well.
Part of, I mean, so at NYU, we have a women's faculty caucus.
I was president for a while, but part of the problem is it takes so much work.
Right now, like, we can't find anybody who wants to be president.
I was going to say, and it's because, you know, it's just been so much, so, you know, a bunch of us ex-presidents
of the women's faculty caucus are kind of forming a committee of people to run a bit.
It takes so much work to go and egg the deans and do.
Again, it's not compensated.
It's not compensated. It's just another committee that you're on, and you have to be persistent.
And, you know, it's just time to start.
But it falls on us too, right? I mean, I think that's the one thing that has been interesting in astronomy,
is that there is a growing group of powerful men who have gotten on the cause
and who are calling out these things within the community and institution.
So, for example, you know, with speakers at all the major conferences,
if the list looks out of alignment with the membership, you know,
a lot of men have become really important spokespersons for these issues.
We are going to look at the audience for questions.
I just wanted to ask something from you.
You said you were first in Israel before you came here.
And I have never been to Israel, but I have heard that, for example, women are a lot more active in the army.
And women are involved teaching men about how to shoot rifles at some of the training facilities.
So, is there a different, because in terms of looking for causes, the psychological causes everybody knows about and talks about all that,
when in terms of societal causes, is there a difference between the way women succeed in various fields, including science,
in Israel compared to the U.S.?
Okay. So, it's a little bit of a long answer.
So, first of all, things in the army have changed drastically.
When I was in the army, I was assigned to a unit.
I was bilingual. I spoke both English and Hebrew.
And it was a unit that needed translators.
But when I got to the unit, the female officer there told me, no, only men translate.
You're going to go and learn to be a secretary and learn to type.
By the way, it turned out to be the best thing in my life, because they went to, and I learned how to blind type in English,
and how much we all use computers, the best effort ever.
But I didn't know that in 1980 when I joined the army. I wasn't so happy. I didn't see the future.
So, the army itself has transformed drastically.
Since I was there now 34 years ago to now, women now are involved in positions like you're saying.
But they're all educational positions. Women teach how to operate the computers on the tank,
how to, the systems in a plane. They do a lot, a lot of things. All theory.
There are very, very few women in combat. So the Israeli army and any army, I'm sure even the American army,
where women I think are slightly allowed in combat. I'm not exactly sure what the situation is.
It's still extremely chauvinistic. There's no question about it that the army is not an equalizer.
And I can tell you a little anecdote just to exemplify this thing.
My sister is the Dean of her law school in Israel.
And she was put on a committee where the head of the committee was a high-ranking officer from the army,
one level below the chief of staff.
And there were four professors on the committee, a professor from Tel Aviv University,
from Haifa University and from Jerusalem in my sister.
And they were interviewing people. And every time that a person would come in, he would say,
this is Professor Cohen from Jerusalem. This is Professor Levy from Tel Aviv.
This is Professor Smolansky from Haifa and Sharon.
Every time she said that every time a person would come in, that's exactly what would happen.
So in some ways, and people from the army are very influential in politics, in companies they're considered to be very,
of course, leaders, no wonder. So they play roles in these organizations.
So the biases do carry over from the army. And I would say that women are, we have the same issue with women in the sciences
and the departments. You look at deans of schools in the sciences, very low percent in my area in computer science,
very, very few women faculty. I would say that the Taeqnion, which is a leading institution, two or three.
I think I left Israel in 1994. And till last year, they didn't hire a single female faculty in computer science.
So that gives you an indication things are not good. So I wouldn't say necessarily worse than here,
but I would say that there's an issue. One thing that I do have to say is that Israeli women, due to financial situation in Israel,
they need to work. Here are many women who marry men who earn a lot of money and so on.
Many of them even haven't gotten a great education. Usually they have great education because that's where they met these successful men.
They stop working. In Israel, not an option. Every woman has a job. Maybe it's not a career, but they have a job.
The women are in the workforce. I would assume maybe an higher percent.
Interesting article in the Times, a couple of weeks back, that even at the high school level, the perception of results in math.
Yes. You know the article. But please repeat because I don't.
The interesting thing was, I'm sorry, I'm horrible to names. Our friend here from astronomy noted that a lot of women
were actually girls in high school. Panic at math. Even though they're score, it was very, the exactly phenomenon that was talked about
about coming in, the guy's dream that has to be too hard. The girls said I want to drop the class, but this was in high school.
At 75, a guy was going to try harder. The girl was looking for a way out. This is cultural.
My grandpa came from a high school where that was unacceptable, but I think we were the rarity.
Is the problem beginning that the problem begins that early?
And the issue of papers, two observations. Is it a choice of safe topic, the same phenomenon effectively?
That a high risk topic might be embarrassing, so you don't do it. A low risk topic is much safer.
And in the resume studies, what about, I forget if that resume study had a category for names which are unisex?
Like Jean in the US and Jean in France getting the obvious cross-correlation issue.
And what about the British trick of just using the initial leading initials?
Part of it, just to get to the very last thing you mentioned, probably everybody's favorite example of gender bias, is this orchestra study.
So basically, once they started to do auditions behind a screen, all of a sudden orchestras became equalized.
Now, the problem is we never have a situation where we're interviewing somebody inside without knowing who they are and meeting them and knowing something about them.
So doing something like that is not possible.
The interesting case is the government grant review, which in theory I thought was supposed to be named sanitize.
You know who does this research? That's the problem.
So it's true only in admissions possibly to grad school that you could do some sanitation, but the minute that people start publishing papers, it's over.
Yes, I had a very funny case in that point, Fran Allen, who you probably know.
The first touring award winner.
The first idea female fellow had a whole collection of stories because when she entered the field, of course all her publications were F. Allen.
And there was a lot of confusion when she showed up at registration.
But I think you already mentioned this. Of course, some of these issues start very young way before high school.
The issue with the grade review is, in fact, despite the theoretical name white, the fact that everybody knows who's doing what research is.
Well, because it's a period of view.
Yeah.
That's a good discussion.
Go ahead.
Yeah, I guess I've worked for many years. I studied computer science and got a master's degree in computer science.
I was probably the first person in my school. We had five computer majors at a women's college when I graduated.
And I think what's been disturbing to me, I don't know if this is a question exactly, but the studies I've seen recently are around the time I graduated, it was probably about 37% or so female.
Graduates of computer science. And today it's maybe 12%.
I have.
And I think I've seen a lot of things, you know, it is a complex problem, but I've seen a number of things.
And I think some of it is maybe cultural. I'm not sure the reason behind it.
You know, it could just be that women tend to think in more liberal arts and concepts and were encouraged to go into those topics versus, I think that with, you know, even in English,
you know, even in India, I see many more women at work from India and other countries.
You know, I would say I feel like an extreme minority in an IT department as a white woman at this point in time.
When I first started working, I would say it was maybe 30% women. I see the numbers going hugely down.
And I see also another disturbing trend for me is kind of the, I would say, startup mentality, where I see a lot of very young people
bringing in their friends and you see kind of the Silicon Valley, you know, even that TV show that's on now.
It's all guys and they all are together in a garage and they don't consider women in these rules.
And even, yeah.
We don't want to be there.
And Facebook and social media, you know, LinkedIn, you see someone's picture. You immediately know if it's a woman.
It's not even their name. You see what they look like. You see their background.
So anyway, I'm throwing that out. I don't know why the numbers are so low now among, you know, computer graduates and technology.
But if there are any comments on that?
So I want to support your point with the data.
Priya was saying before that in all the sciences, things are advancing, but there's no question that computer science is going backwards.
That's a known fact. The numbers are decreasing.
Also, when I was studying, we were 25 to 30 percent. Today, the numbers are much lower.
It's an excellent question what's happening to computer science compared to math because a lot of computer science is somewhat connected to math.
Definitely, when you're doing a degree, you study math as well. Math is going up. We're not.
I think that it has something to do with the vision that the world has of what it is like to work in computers later on.
But the truth is that I'm baffled by it.
Okay. So the environment maybe is very male dominated and goes by the male definition of how things should be and so on.
But so many of these startup companies do things that women should be so happy to be doing. They relate to social issues.
They enable things, improvements on things that are dear to women's art that are, they deal within their lives continuously,
but they could really have a huge effect working in such startup.
Doesn't do it. Doesn't do it from computer science.
We, on top of the women in science, I think are facing yet another challenge.
And I don't know what's the source of the additional problem.
I just want to mention here that I've been reading about, and I'm sure all of you have read about Maria Cloud and sort of the initiative that she's been doing about freshman.
One of the barriers is this idea that you have to be an ace coder in order to start a startup or whatever.
And so I think she's trying to get at that by getting freshman women started on coding and by revamping how it's taught.
And she's done a very successful experiment. And let's hope that sort of ratchets.
But you know, I think the startup culture thing is puzzling. It is very puzzling.
But you know, once again, it's such a mythology around how a company gets started, a successful company.
It's a bunch of guys who are friends who, you know, that...
But they could join. They don't need to start. But I have to tell you guys the story about this Maria Clava,
who you have to know her. She's a complete character.
But she has all kinds of ideas. And of course she does a lot.
She left. She was the dean at Princeton and she left to be the president at Harvey Mudd.
But once I had met her and she had this idea that she wanted to get to J.K. Rawlings.
And she thought she had a way because she thought that through Tony Morris and at Princeton, she would get to Oprah and she'd get to J.K. Rawlings.
And what did she want J.K. Rawlings to do?
She wanted her to make Hermione. Did I say the name correctly?
No, Hermione.
Hermione. She wanted Hermione.
She wanted J.K. Rawlings to make Hermione study computer science.
That's what she wanted to do.
And I don't think Harry Potter, but I know that it didn't happen.
In fact, I saw her. Exactly. I think that Maria Clava then realized that maybe it wasn't a normal path for a magician or a sort of a...
No, no, no.
It's a very... It plays to a very important point in public culture and media and the presentation of women and girls' children in the media.
And I think we have to think really hard about how to use the media to subvert some of these stereotypes.
I think that is a... It was going to be a lot more effective than we actually imagined.
Well, first of all, just in terms of what you mentioned before the names, I remember reading...
Maybe a year ago, most that this article of a man was applying for a job in construction.
He just lost his jobs looking for a new one. He had tons of experience.
Now, his name is Unisex Kim, but he couldn't get an offer anywhere despite his experience.
And then he looked at the resume trying to figure out what's going on.
He was probably the name, so he changed one minor thing on the resume. He wrote, Mr. Kim.
And suddenly offers poured in out of nowhere.
So before that, the same resume wasn't getting anything because of this whole mentality that you were talking about.
I mean, from high school, I'm not sure exactly what age it starts, but it needs to go in.
Everybody, like on the internet, was getting mad at him, but why are they getting mad at him and not the owners of all these companies?
And in many cases, even it's just local companies, huge chains or something.
So you know, bias operates because there's such a gendered notion of profession, right?
So who's meant to be doing what and who's meant to be excellent at what?
Yeah, that was very interesting.
And there was also, like you were talking about being, you know, like wandering through the desert or whatever.
I read about one of the first women in Princeton.
They didn't start admitting women as undergrads until 1969.
And she said that when she was in an economics class, the professor said to the three women in the class,
I don't know what you're doing here. I'm not going to call on you throughout the semester, and he stuck to it.
So you had an academia people doing this, you know, and then in the workplace.
I mean, where do you start to rehabilitate society?
Everywhere.
Yeah.
I mean, what day you're born, there has to be a different level of teaching.
It makes me wonder, it's hard to convince an economist that he or she is not rational, he usually is.
So.
Hi. I teach at a community college. I teach writing.
And my question is the model of women in sports.
Right now, you don't have to feel that you're an athlete to play soccer.
You know, your kid, they have teams in every junior high school or high school.
There's a culture, but 50 years ago, 40 years ago, they wouldn't let women on a tennis team because they thought it would give them a heart attack.
So what I'm asking is, to what degree have the women in science started efforts to make doing science, however that means,
whether it's from the point of view of cooking or looking at women, you know, biographies of women in science, it seems to me that has to happen from grade two.
And I wonder, because so that the culture then, the expectation is not such a rarefied expectation.
And also, you haven't really talked about class in relation to these access.
For example, at this community college, I'm teaching working class people whose parents are working class people and who know they're working class people and who are hoping and praying that they're going to even get a job.
So that where's the access of science? How is science making itself, inserting itself into the popular culture, other than through the great discoveries, the stars and the screw-ups.
So actually, my field, I think, is doing some very interesting, innovative things. And one of the projects I think you must have all heard about, this notion of citizen science, getting citizens involved in the doing of science, all age groups.
And of course, you notice that, you know, children, younger people, are really quite over-represented in that group.
So for example, there's a project called Galaxy Zoo, where there's now so much data about external galaxies, other galaxies, that you need help astronomers can classify galaxies on their own.
It's often done by eye. It's actually more reliable, done by eye, than automating it.
So what they've done now is these projects have put the data in this project called Galaxy Zoo.
They put the data out, and anyone can take a small training session to understand what it is that they're doing.
And they can train, and they can classify. And so for instance, and then people are looking, and even I have co-authored a paper with a woman who was a Dutch school teacher, who found this bizarre object, which was unclassifiable.
And it turns out there's many of them. And she actually ended up on a scientific paper with all of us, because she found the object, and we figured out what it was.
It turns out it wasn't quite a light echo, wasn't quite a galaxy. But I think astronomy is trying, and it's trying not as self-consciously as it's just sort of opening up science, not with the view of the gender, but really access.
There are people who do not have the access to get into educational institutions where they can get started on science, either school, high schools, they don't go to good enough schools, or because of economic barriers.
I think there's some effort, but there really isn't as much work from what I can see on class, and the intersection of gender and class. But all of these things are very fraught in terms of access to admission and affirmative action, and all these things are quite fraught.
I also think the notion of socioeconomic status is one of the reasons why we have a lot fewer minorities, in your lack of Americans, for instance, because there's a correlation between race and socioeconomic status here.
You know, I have great students, but you have to feel somewhat comfortable financially to invest in a career where you're not going to really make a salary until you're 40. And so I do think that actually plays a bigger role in some of the racial differences we see in science, which are profound.
But also the sort of uncertainty in the career. Also, there's uncertainty as well. And the fact that you have to move, right? Because this is pertinent because it makes a difference to women as well as socioeconomic status.
It deters people who feel that they don't have the freedom to indulge, you know, they see this as an indulgent career.
So most of my students who don't come from someone else's families will go to medical school instead of going into sciences. Yeah.
Not that medical school isn't science, don't get me wrong. But they'll go in for practicing doctors.
In observation, the medical school, medicine is an interesting example. They've been a whole bunch of comments made both autobiographical and statistical that even though med school classes enter at 50-50, pediatrics has become almost a female preserve.
And surgery, even 40 years after women broke into surgery, is highly hostile in many cases. And the anecdotes that I've heard people tell me, and I've seen in print, are the worst of frat house hazing I've ever heard.
The interesting thing about how early the problem becomes two anecdotes. One is the computer science achievement test makes very interesting statistical reading in terms of who takes it and where.
Heavily white, very unheavily minority, and very heavy and certain strips of the United States. The problem starts early. Secondly, it was also of some very interesting comments made recently by Neil deGrasse Tyson on an interview panel about the obstacles he encountered
being African American on his way to the directorship of the hate and sanitarium. Makes upsetting reading when you hear it.
Thank you. First of all, I'd like to thank you very much for having this talk. I think it's very, very important and very germane to all of society, not just women in general.
I'd also like to say that a lot of the younger men, and this is sociological, it is not anyone's fault, a lot of younger men seem to be more interested in what women, having women as a part of their whole career as opposed to the secretaries or the receptionist or whatever.
I'd like to introduce another little thought in there and that's women as they age. I was thrown out of a job in 2009 like a lot of other people were, and I'm a paralegal. I've been for many years.
They were no jobs. They need their attorneys. They need their secretaries. They don't need paralegals. Everybody does those jobs. When there's a lot of money around, they use us because we are very important. We do a lot of work that both of those other careers do.
In the meantime, I got thrown out of a job. My father had been an electrical contractor, and my love of math came from him and my mechanical abilities. I heard of a training course, a pre-apprenticeship course called new, non-traditional employment for women.
It's not an apprenticeship program. It's a pre-apprenticeship program to help women get into the unions. We were expected, and I got in, to the pre-apprenticeship program. We were expected to carry enormous weights.
They showed us how to carry sheetrock, which a lot of buildings are made out of and a lot of things are made out of. It's about as big as I am. I was taught how to carry it, and not just pick it up, but I mean actually walk around with it and things, and carry huge toolboxes
full of all kinds of tools and all kinds of things. It was just amazing. Also, I was taught incredible math. I have amazing math skills because of that.
I went to private school. There's no reason, private girls school. There's no reason why I shouldn't have learned it there.
That was in the old days when I also had nuns, and some of them were in retirement or nearby there, and they kept them around.
That's fine. That's what happened. In the meantime, I lagged a bit in my math skills. Given that background, here I am over 40 and starting a new career in that sort of thing.
The other thing that they introduced was the idea that we have to really mind our own businesses and not talk to people, and men or women in the unions, because they'll get at us. They're trying to get our spots, and they're trying to get rid of us.
It was like this amazing explanation of the culture, and it was very different than how I was taught, and living as a paralegal and things like this. It was just a very interesting education.
I think if we wrote Screenplays about that sort of thing, it would change things, talking about the cultures. I think the Big Bang Theory is great, except the women are stupid, most of them. And I think it would be incredible if the women were not so stupid, and they were portrayed as different things.
I mean, women as they age, I mean, I can write a screenplay. I'm actually trained now to write a screenplay, because I was a theater major in college, and it was just great, but I went more for the arts, even though I loved science. I really loved science, but I did go into the arts because I loved that as well.
I felt that I had to fit my personality a little bit better for some reason, but so now I've got Screenplays that do that, but what do we do for older women? When I went to that construction school and could not pick up that 61 pounds without throwing my back out, and was never retested, even though I worked at it. I was never retested, and they didn't want to hear about it.
I said, okay, now what do I do? So I talked to someone who was an engineer, a woman engineer, and then I went to Cooper Union and talked to the people over there, and they were like, oh, look at your background.
You'd have to work too hard. If you're going to do anything, you should be a mechanical engineer, not an electrical engineer.
So what do we do for people that do want to go into it? Young women, yes, let's get them involved. It's important to help them get that leg up. And men, and young boys, young men, but young women especially.
But what do we do for the older women that want to enter the force, except saying, sorry honey, I'll read a nice book about it. It's not the same thing.
So I'd like to see what we can do about that. I have an answer which you might not like, but in my area of computer science, not only older women have a problem, but older men have a problem.
This is a young, young field. If you're not in your 20 or your 30s and you get laid off, you have a problem also if you're a man in computer science.
So at least in this area, I don't think you're going to find a good answer because it's not only women who are struggling.
But I think coming back to your point of retraining older women and possibly men who have interest in science and math, but somehow didn't enter the formal pipeline.
Personally, I think that it's obviously tricky whether and how you could join the work force even if you did get trained.
But one exciting thing that I think is happening that we've all probably sort of registering now are the MOOCs.
So you can get trained. You can learn. And then if you find a new passion, then you can find a route back in.
So these massive open online courses which are free, available on many platforms, there's some excellent courses in mathematics in every field.
And so I think that there's room now for possibly people who did not discover their passion for science or gave it up early to kind of...
Either have a family or do something else.
Yeah, to do something, it may not be the quickest way to get a job, but it's a way to sort of grow your passion and then if you're serious, you can probably find a route back in.
One of the challenges is, like I said, most people, assistant professors, I think now you get your first NIH grant on average like at 42.
Right.
So I mean, this is because you've gone through graduate school, then you've gone through postdoctoral training.
That's sort of like when you're just getting going in some of these disciplines.
It's pretty scary. I mean, I went through quick, so I missed that, but that's where we are now today.
So it's a little bit hard to have a traditional career in science, given that it takes that long to even get.
So then the question becomes, what are the other careers in science?
And this is something we talked to our students about who maybe do not want to be doing the whole science thing, but there's science foundations, there's science...
Journalism, there's all sorts of things.
And so these are kind of non-traditional careers which don't necessarily take all this, but we aren't very good at identifying that.
And we're also not very good at counseling our students about it because that's not what we did.
But there are quite a few non-traditional careers in science, I think, that you just have to kind of be creative about and look at and see where the avenues are.
If nothing, I'm very creative.
But I have to say, I really think...
But I just want to finish one point. I think that there are definitely great education.
You can learn a lot of things online and I agree that these courses are fantastic and so on.
But I do want to leave this not on an optimistic point, because I think that this society admires youth.
And getting jobs at older ages is much harder.
And we have a huge population that's unemployed in their 20s.
All my friends, they're 20-year-olds, they're living at home with them, not working.
So the older people are competing with these young people.
So I think that maybe you could train yourself to do something else and maybe have a wonderful time and really enrich yourself.
But I think that getting paid later is a whole different story.
That's why I take on things. It's not a happy one, but that's how I see things.
We have a question and one question that the answer probably is not so quick.
Do you find that women would submit articles more often to journals where the woman is an editor?
The editor is a woman. That's maybe the quick question.
And the other is, do you see anything that women bring to science?
Is there a particular sensibility that you believe women bring that does have a difference in it from a male scientist?
I personally have never even thought about who the editor is.
Unless it was sort of like a science or nature where you kind of know who the editors are, they're professional editors.
Other than that, I've actually never thought.
And I was an editor of a journal and it just didn't even occur to me to have that be one of these.
It doesn't have a full word.
No, I mean, I couldn't even name the editors of most of the journals that I submit to.
You usually submit to the editor in chief also and that's whoever it is.
But different people evaluate it like so the who evaluates it is not the editor sends it out to peers.
You don't know who those people are from the evaluation which is really the critical part.
So I never really think that.
I mean, my view, I don't have the data.
That's an interesting point.
We'll be worth looking at.
We've not had too many women editors too.
But I think there are some now who are on the editorial board.
It'll be interesting to see whether that encourages more women to even sort of submit.
Particularly for nature and science.
That might be an interesting.
Nature and science, I think.
You don't submit to the editor in chief?
No, we send it to people and I edit it.
So there's an astronomy, it's so happy that the astronomy women, they are women, the editors.
And I've submitted to them.
Then you know who the editor is and you kind of know what they like and don't like.
I actually think they're pretty, they are very biased.
In my field, many journals say you sent to the editor in chief and the editor in chief distribute.
It's different, they're little, slightly different cultures and everything.
About your second question, as I said, I don't think that women and men are the same.
And I do think that we bring something special to the research.
And going back to Priya's point about not discussing whether we have the aptitude or we don't have the aptitude,
diversity, even in gender, in the research, makes a difference.
And that's why the reason that I think that the question is also non-interesting,
because we need the women in order for it to be different.
And I see when I work with my guy colleagues, you've heard many times I have only guy colleagues.
I look at things differently and I can't put the finger on it.
It's not that I can say this is what, it's different.
That's all I can say without.
You know, I don't know, I don't think I want to give a blanket answer on this because I don't understand it well enough.
But I think there is a richness that comes from the diversity of experience of backgrounds, etc., etc.
How well that correlates to gender more strongly, I'm not so sure, because I think that that spread in diversity is there in both genders.
I mean, there are lots of men who think very laterally and there are some men who think very linearly.
There are lots of women who think laterally and lots of women who think linearly.
So I don't know how that works.
And I personally feel that it's a sort of a dangerous question.
Only because of the fact that there's a danger that certain biases can get reinforced with flawed data.
I think that the whole issue is dangerous.
It's like a minefield when we're just walking between something that blows up and you lose a leg.
I think it's an extremely charged thing.
But I think that the most important thing, and I think it's okay to say things like I say that we're not the same.
People might be horrified, especially women.
But it's okay to say things and everybody can have a different thing.
But I think that the problem is that we're not given equal opportunities.
And it doesn't matter if we're the same or not, but the opportunities should be the same.
And that's why, and it's okay to discuss these things and it's okay to say things without data and it's okay to say things with data.
It's now on our topic of discussion.
But I think when we get different pay, when we get don't get the promotions, when we're not given this, when we don't have the right money.
We're not getting the equal opportunities.
And that's what we should be fighting for.
And I think there is no question that we contribute tremendously to every field that we're in.
And I do want to say that I think that much I see in terms of women scientists who have been put in charge of things,
they're just as variables of the men in terms of what they're good at.
What did you say?
They're just as variable as the men, I think, in terms of what they're good at and not good at.
And so I think part of the issue is sometimes people have a stereotype about what we're supposed to be like as women.
And so we get assigned to things.
In some departments, I won't mention, but Christina knows, the women are always the director of undergraduate studies.
And the problem is those stereotypes are changing our responsibilities and they're not getting the more nurturing administrative roles,
not that they're necessarily nurturing people because not all women are nurturing.
And some men are nurturing. And so I do worry a little bit about those types of assignments.
But I just feel like I've seen huge variability in women, both in the hands of power.
That's exactly what I was trying to say.
How receptive they are to these types of things, whether they actually think it's an issue or not an issue.
And variability in men too.
Thank you very much for the sitti.
Thank you.
