 Madner Sesien, thank you for coming. I will briefly give you an introduction to the people at the round table and then we will get going. Marit Delosier is sitting there. She's lawyer and assistant attorney, district attorney in New York City. Prior to becoming a prosecutor, she clerked for the DC Court of Appeals and also served as Special Legal Counsel to the Senate Judiciary Committee on the nomination of Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts. Prior to becoming a lawyer, she enjoyed the career in media after graduating from Northwestern University. Professor Nancy DeMosso is sitting there. She is the Vice Dean for Faculty and Research and Professor of Management and Global Business at Rutgers Business School. Her research specialties include the management of diversity and change, the management of knowledge-based organizations and the management of scientists and engineers. She has co-authored and co-edited five books and has had articles published in many journals. Her recent book is the American Nondilemma and is available from the Russell Sage Foundation. Sorry, and on the table. She has been elected to several national offices in various professional associations, including a position on the American Sociological Association Council as chair of the Organizations and Occupational Section of the ASA and as president of the Society for the Advancement of Socioeconomics. Ernesto Rubin is Associate Assistant Professor at Columbia Business School. Well, it says Assistant One Place Associate One Place and one is, oh, your Associate Professor of Management Columbia Business School. Assistant Professor. At Columbia Business School. Yes. Okay. His research interests live within behavior and public economics. He investigates the role played by social norms and particular psychological traits on activities that are economically relevant for public policy and business strategy. More recently, he's been working on the role of reciprocity in the interaction between special interest groups and politicians, the effect of present bias preferences on procrastination, and how implicit associations can lead to biased expectations and discrimination. Ernesto has taught courses in public economics, microeconomics, experimental economics, statistic and strategy at numerous universities. Patricia Taylor, who is married to Kenneth Taylor, the former Canadian Ambassador to Iran who's sitting back there. She has followed her husband on many of his assignments and therefore has held positions at various cities around the world. Guatemala City, Detroit, Karachi, London, Tehran and New York. In Ottawa, she was head of the National Hepatitis Reference Laboratory and became chief of the Virus Diagnostic Services Division. She has held a number of research fellowships and scholarships including international fellowship from the American Association of University Women, Fulbright and Rockefeller Foundation grants and served on several Canadian U.S. and World Health Organization, Public Health and Expert Scientific Advisory Committees. She's a member of the Order of Canada and has honorary doctors of the Doctor of Law from St. Francis Xavier University. Her awards include Women of the Year from the Canadian Women's Club, the Harry Edmund Award for Lifetime Achievement from International House New York. She was a violinist with the Universities of Queensland and California Orchestra and danced with ballet companies in Australia, Guatemala and California. She currently serves as the chair of the Women's International Leadership Advisory Council of I House New York. International House New York. Thank you. We can just get going. Well, I feel humbled. So I'm going to let one of y'all start. Well, you know, what puzzles me continuously in traveling around the world is that the United States seems to be out of step with many countries, other countries in the world, such as the Nordic countries where there is a high employment rate amongst women. So what comments might you have on that? Well, I attended a conference recently where one of the participants addressed that issue and mentioned that some of the social democratic policies that have affected women in the workforce in the Nordic countries essentially emerged when some of the Nordic countries were concerned about the influence of immigrants on their economy. So essentially, some of those policies emerged essentially to keep the labor force more Swedish or Norwegian or whatever. So while we can look at those policies and admire them, I think that it reminds us that for any kind of assessment of what's happening to women in the labor force or women in the workforce or women in social relationships in general, that we have to look at a number of different factors. We have to look at the social, the legal, the economic, the behavioral, the psychological. Since, by training, I'm a sociologist and do study diversity in the labor force, including race, ethnicity, gender, and other kinds of differences. I did, I'm fairly familiar with the, at least the research findings for the US, not as much the research findings around the world, although when we're talking about women in the labor force, particularly in advanced countries, it looks pretty much the same. So let me just mention a couple things and then maybe that can spark some of the conversation. There's a very good book that just came out fairly recently called Documenting De-Segregation that analyzed the data from the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission from 1966 through 2005 and looking particularly at the issues of what has happened since the passage of the civil rights movement to segregation for various kinds of groups from white men in the labor force in the US. And the big story there is that much less has changed than we probably assume. The biggest story of the stories in that book is that essentially white men have retained their access to the best jobs at the same proportion that they had when the civil rights movement was passed and in some cases in some types of occupations and industries they've actually enhanced their access to those types of jobs. So that the access for women of various types and minorities in the labor force have both basically come from growth of jobs at the lower end of the distribution in terms of authority income, etc. or in the public sector because these data are all for private sector organizations. The second finding was that although there was a slight decline in the segregation between white men and black men from about 1966 to about 1980, small change. Something has happened since 1980. It's basically been flat in terms of the desegregation of black men from white men. The desegregation of black women from white men never changed much. It was very high. It stayed very high. Slight, slight shift but basically no change. For white women from white men there has been somewhat more of a change. It was slow to start. It accelerated a bit through the 70s and 80s but basically trailed off about 2000 and has not changed much since then. While some white women have entered jobs that previously were held only by white men, it has contributed to a resegregation between white women and black women in terms of the jobs that they hold. But even with the advances that white women have made in the labor force, essentially they are now almost at parity with black men in terms of the proportion working in the same jobs as white men. Even if you look only at managerial jobs, again white men's over representation has been absolutely not changed since the civil rights movement. In other words, under representation has declined to some extent but again they are still almost but not quite at the level of their representation in the labor force. Black men and black women, there has been almost no change in terms of their representation in managerial jobs. Professional jobs, same story although white women doing slightly better in terms of their representation and in craft jobs, essentially same story. So white men still dominate the best jobs. Over the last 50 years there has been advances for white women. There have been modest changes for black men and black women but not much for the last 35 years since about 1980. So I think that that's something to keep in mind when we're talking about what is happening and why those dynamics haven't changed more than we would anticipate it. That deals with the situation as it is. It doesn't deal with why that situation has become so. Why do white men still dominate those managerial positions? Well, I do have an answer for that. Let me give mine very quickly and then I'll turn it over to others. The book that is sitting on the table out there that I recently published is really focused on racial inequality but I think it is related to issues of gender inequality as well. So my explanation for why there hasn't been more change in terms of equality in general since the passage of the civil rights movement is because all of the focus has been on issues of discrimination and racism or sexism. Essentially framing everything in a negative way. What bad things whites do toward blacks or what bad things men do toward women. So again discrimination, racism, sexism. But I think in the post civil rights period and it affects women as well as racial minorities, but most of the action has been in terms of whites helping each other, whites helping other whites or men helping other men. And those kinds of things are not illegal. Discrimination is illegal but giving favor to people who are like you is not illegal. So while some public policy issues have focused on the discrimination against women, there's been very little attention on how men keep hiring other men and promoting them and paying them more and so on. And same thing in terms of whites hiring other whites and giving them higher salaries and more authority and better jobs and more promotions and so on. Let me just add to that that I think there is something that everybody continues to neglect. And that's the women that hurt other women. It is a huge issue that I've seen in the workplace. Not where I work now, but I'm just saying in general with people, I remember in 1998 Gloria Steinem was speaking at Union Square and I was younger then. And I had read Revolution from Within, I had been working at ABC Television and I was the last person who got to ask a question and she was launching a new magazine. You know, just kind of about a lot of these different issues and women in the workplace and things like that. And I raised my hand and I said, with all due respect, you prepared me in how I could choose to deal with discrimination, sexism, all these things. I feel like I've been given a voice as someone who's going forward in my career. What we haven't addressed is the fact that I think women in many respects are our own worst enemies at work. I think the fact remains that part of the sexism and things like that is the perception that women are highly emotional, that they get into these other dialogues that have nothing to do with the work at hand. They are more inclined to suck up to men thinking that that will give them an advantage rather than promoting the woman sitting next to them that is equally intelligent and qualified. And until women start embracing other women in the workplace, they're all pitted against each other. So what does that mean? No one supports each other so that if a second job comes up, that person has pretty much been tarnished in a certain way and a man is free to get on in that spot. I mean, this is just a theory I have from watching and learning and talking to people, and I think it's something that people are forgetting to address and is incredibly important. So I think that as women, we do have to take some responsibility as well. That's actually very consistent with the research on discrimination, which doesn't necessarily show that women are worse than or are tougher than other women, but they certainly don't, let's say, help. So both men and women tend to discriminate at the similar rates when it comes to promotions and things like this. And the reasons for that, I mean, there could be many, but it's certainly something that you see. You don't see a very strong favor. It is between women. This is for top jobs. And that's a very important point to make, that there's been enormous strides in labor for participation and things like this, but it's important to think of the role of women in the labor force, not just overall, but thinking of the top positions where the situation looks very different, where there hasn't been as much progress, and coming somewhat to this point about different countries, these can actually vary a lot. So some countries that might look very well on overall statistics, actually for the top jobs might not look so well. And it's not necessarily the same type of policies that would help women get promoted to the top jobs than the ones that would help just women go out and get some job. So that's something that still needs to learn more about. Other countries, for example, like the Netherlands has great statistics when it comes to labor for participation. And so that's driven by a lot of part-time work. It's driven by a lot of work at lower positions. So in top positions, you see a lot of discrimination. So it varies a lot. I thought you were going to go somewhere else in response to the comments. And I'm not sure I agree with you, and I'm not sure the data support, what you've just said. But with a couple caveats. It is the case that men and women, whites and blacks are, for the most part, similarly affected by the cultural messages and experiences that we all have. So for example, when the distribution of resources overlays categorical differences. So for example, most CEOs are white men. And then cognitively, when we see that over and over again, we come to assume cognitively that the people in those kinds of positions deserve to have them. That's called status expectations theory. And it's been demonstrated in a number of different ways. So those kinds of messages we all share. And if you look at implicit associations or implicit association tests, men and women are so similarly affected by those kinds of messages. But it isn't the case, I think, that having the representation of women in higher level jobs wouldn't be beneficial in terms of hiring more women in general. In fact, I think that there is some research that showed at least limited research that when women, for example, in law firms, if women are represented in top level positions in law firms, then they're more likely to hire other women in those firms compared to men. But where I thought you were going is what's called the double bind for women, which is that because of these cognitive associations in our heads, we associate being a good manager, being a good leader with being a male. And so when we think manager, we think male. And so women who enact the behaviors that we think of as being a good manager or a good leader are thought of as not being sufficiently female or feminine in their behavior. And so they're thought of as competent but not nice. And if they enact the more feminine role of being emotional and nice and caring and so on, then their thought about as being nice but not competent. And that trade-off doesn't exist for men. Men can be both competent and nice. In fact, they are thought of as that way when they're in top leadership positions, but it isn't the case for women. So if women face that double bind and they are having to walk that narrow line, then their behaviors in those roles may be somewhat different than men because women are having to address other kinds of issues about how they're perceived and how they get evaluated. So even they may be subject to those kinds of messages. So if they are in a position to select someone for a job, they also may perceive a woman as being competent but not nice or nice but not competent and also feel that they should hire the man because he seems to have the traits that are the whole package. The whole package, right. But visiting that, how do you change that sort of cognitive perception that you have? To me, that sort of change would take more than a generation, take several generations of thinking in that way. So it's a very difficult situation. Well, I've had that question addressed particularly with regard to my book on racial inequality a lot. So what do you do if whites help other whites? And they act with favor toward other whites and it's not really discrimination and racism. Well the first answer to that is it's not an individual solution. It's not something that you can do simply by changing your own behavior. It's really a collective solution. It's a public policy solution. It's a social movement solution. But short of that, you can also have organizational policies that change if organizations have more accountability for the kinds of decisions that get made. That can make a difference. And then individual people can make a difference. But to do so, they can't just try to be better. The research tends to show that they have to be explicit about these cultural biases that they hold and make them salient. And when they do that, they're less likely to enact the kind of cultural biases that would lead to giving favor to men over women. So those are some of the kinds of things that could be done. One thing that's not emphasized enough I think is a lot of this is put in a way that seems to be like we should favor women in some way. And organizations you can think they don't want to do that because they might be worried that you will hurt their performance, that they will be just a political correctness type of thing. And it should be much more emphasized that that's not the case. That actually even unknowingly if your organization, this favoritism or some sort of discrimination, you are actually hurting your organization because you're not promoting the most qualified people. And that message should be out there so that let's say men, which are the ones that hold now the top positions, start to worry more about and say we should actually worry about these associations, these stereotypes that exist about what is a good leader. And so we try to be much more objective about there's lots of evidence that show that women perform equally if not better sometimes that men in many, many managerial positions but the stereotype might still be that the man is the, or the qualities that are associated with men are the ones that you want as leaders which is not necessarily the case. But if we come back to the differences between the United States and for example will take the Nordic countries. Aren't there policies in those countries that the United States or women as a whole strive towards for instance the type of leave they have, the existence of public funded daycare centers and things of that nature. Yeah certainly those kinds of policies make a huge difference is that in the Nordic countries and in Europe more so than in the US or England I guess. Having paid childcare for some period of time makes it easier to manage the work family issues than the other, you know they have similar laws about non-discrimination and so on but give more support for women who might have responsibility for children and families or elder care and so on. The other thing that I believe the Nordic countries have done, I don't know for sure but I know some European countries and I think it's the Nordic countries have mandated a certain proportion of representation on their boards of directors. That's right. I think 30%. 40%. So the assumption there is that if you have representation of women in these positions that then the policies in the firms will be less likely to be discriminatory or at least will be more likely to be fair and the research on those kinds of issues of which there is some emerging tend to show that there isn't a direct clear relationship between that kind of representation and better performance but at least there is no evidence to suggest that that kind of representation leads to lesser performance. So it's not the case that's coming. The changes are a little very recent so you would expect that at the beginning there might be a shorter qualified woman to fill all these positions because the demand didn't exist and now as years pass and then more and more women get. There is something that let's say I see in my research or what I'm interested in my research is this idea that if you think you're not going to be promoted you're not going to work as hard to get those promotions. So differences that look like maybe the man looks like he's performing a little bit better was because he has better incentives to work hard. Like this idea with the boards if suddenly you know that 40% of the board will be female now there's going to be some woman that will start to think and say well if I want to be a member of the board I need to do this five things and then get the necessary qualifications and as this happens then my hope or my prediction will be that performance will get better after you get enough qualified women. But the comment that you made about if you think you're not going to be promoted you don't work as hard is an anthema to a woman's ability to be promoted isn't promotion dependent on performance so if you don't perform well then you're not going to get promoted. It's a cycle right and that's the problem this is why it's so hard to break because if you think you're not going to get promoted you're not going to work as hard so then you're not going to get promoted because you're not as good as the equivalent male but you cannot change only one side you cannot you need to change both sides for this to break the conversation makes it sound like promotions and other kinds of choices like this are based on merit and we know that is not the case that it is centrally based on who knows or supports or is sponsoring whom and the fact that there are any number of people who might be thought of as qualified so it's not the best person it's the one who has the right connections the right people the right place in the right time and in general if white men are in the decision making positions they will tend to hire other white men or promote them or give them raises and so on and that's that's true actually throughout the labor force not just at the top and it's very consequential let me give you an example that was very interesting to me about a year and a half ago I was invited to attend a conference that was sponsored by a major company fortune 100 company that wanted to have business school faculty do a better job of admitting and training and graduating minority students because they wanted to be able to hire them and they thought if they could influence the faculty they would do a better job with the students so the CEO of this company came to this little conference of about 30 people and gave an impassioned plea about the importance of diversity to the survival of his firm he said that like many firms 75 percent of their profits and the growth of the company was coming from outside the United States he said that people had to learn to work with people whose names they couldn't pronounce and that in general that the firm would not survive if middle management didn't become more representative of the world and so on and so in this discussion I posed to him the issue about implicit bias that so many people have heard about about unconscious bias the fact that we have these cognitive messages in our heads he knew all about that he had brought one of the key researchers from Harvard into talk to the top management of the firm he knew all about trying to get rid of implicit bias and yet at dinner that night I learned from one of the HR directors that that firm rewarded people in the company who recommended people they later hired so he was supposedly wanted to increase the diversity of middle management but middle management was disproportionately white men and so if they recommended people it was going to be other white men and so his whole framework about bias was bias against he wanted to get rid of the bias against people and gave no attention to the fact that in his firm continually there was bias for whites hiring other whites and so he thought the survival of his firm depended on having a more diverse labor force and yet they had policies in this firm which were reproducing the system labor force. If I can also go back to the comment about a woman who perceives rightly or wrongly that someone a male white male black male even just a male is going to be promoted so they kind of just laws that become laws like there I have to disagree I feel like there are a lot of women that work even harder when they see that situation I feel like that's been our MO is that we have to to prove ourselves and everything else but we're still not getting that job or that managerial position or that CEO level you know I think that it's a real problem when people perceive women is giving up or just going to accept the status quo because I really don't know any woman that does that on any level willingly there's a difference in how they've been raised or the values or their own self-esteem and I think self-esteem does play in a immense role in this as well I think in those situations that you're talking about a lot of women because they've either been rejected or they feel like they've been passed up or whatever their self-esteem becomes smaller and smaller and so they don't demand what they deserve and I don't think that's addressed men don't seem to engage in these same types of dialogues at least in the people that I've observed if anything their ego is often inflated it's true and so they don't they don't second guess themselves all the time I mean I speak when at least in my line of work women are always coming back and kind of second guessing one so I have right that it is like this perfectionist thing and men are just kind of like it is what it is let's move on what's the next witness you know it's it's like this thing and I think some of that is based on how we're groomed to to think about ourselves as women and I also want to get back to the point I think you mean an excellent excellent observation I'm just curious how you all would view yourselves in your work careers are you the nice incompetent one or you the one who's um can I swear bitch from hell but like gets it done like you know I'm just curious and where has that gone for you because I can say it for me I've grown I used to start out in pantsuits and things like that being kind of what I perceived you know was the right track and then I said you know what I'm a woman and like I'm gonna wear makeup and I'm gonna you know wear heels and I'm gonna you know not wear hose sometimes in court and I'm gonna wear pink I'm gonna wear blue I'm gonna be who I am and I've seen how that's worn out for me I'm just curious if either one of you has ever identified with one of those I just want to raise a point about something you said that we all know that you're not promoted because of what you do it's who you know and that that's generalizing though because there are situations well there are a lot of situations and they are careers for instance in science that's promotion depends on what you have achieved your ability to do it good or bad positive or negative and it doesn't depend at all on who you might know in the department and I know that because we have traveled so much and I have gone to various institutes oftentimes not knowing anyone at all and it's only on a CV that your position and your salary is estimated it doesn't depend on who you know or that's that's a wonderful that's a wonderful setup for my response because of course a lot of the research I've done are on scientists and engineers and my research does not show what you have just said I did a study of 24 major multi-billion dollar US companies in different parts of the country with 3200 scientists and engineers and we had data on their career experiences and then we also had the evaluation of their managers and in the analyses that we did we looked at two different kinds of outcomes one was their evaluation as being innovative which is a key thing for scientists and engineers and the other thing was their evaluation as promotable into management and among other factors controlling for all the kinds of things that you think you should control for we looked at their access to favorable work experiences which in science and engineering is being able to choose your own work as opposed to having someone assign it to you and we found in that analysis that US-born white men were more likely than other groups to be able to choose their own work and what's called access to technical control and then over and above their access to these favorable work experiences they also got higher evaluations on innovativeness and higher evaluations on promoted, promoted into management, net of patents, net of publications, net of their education, net of their years of experience so essentially US-born white men were getting the benefit of the doubt and they were getting favorable experiences that affected their evaluation as being more qualified and then also more likely to be promoted into management so even in science and engineering where you think that there's a very hardened fast kind of measurement of merit they're simply isn't and certainly in any university that is quite evident you can take any one's qualifications and they can be interpreted in a number of different ways I've been on the faculty for I think about 40 years now I've been tenured for a long time set on many many personnel committees and the bar gets raised or lowered depending on who the candidate is and who in the room wants to be favorable toward that person and you can fight against it and you can raise all kinds of questions about merit but you know you can't finesse zero if the person has done nothing then you can't do much but no one for the most part is in that situation everyone has done something and then depending on whose friends with whom the case can get presented as the best things in sliced bread or it can be sort of just not good enough you know needs to go somewhere else because it doesn't meet our standards I suppose the difference is the type of science that you're in you're involved in because I was in biological science and the fact that I never aspired to a management role in fact I couldn't because we moved so much but certainly my CV or curriculum VITA made a difference and the papers I'd published and the research that I had done did contribute towards the position that I was able to get. Yeah that's true for everyone certainly patents and publications had a positive effect but the issue is net of that controlling for that US white men still got the benefit of the doubt and they got favorable assignments. Well I can see that might be the outcome. My data included you know electronic and biology and chemistry and every type of science so it was not limited to a certain field. Did you do one in law? I didn't do the work in law but there are lots and lots of research on lawyers and they tend to show the same thing. Really? Oh absolutely. Okay. I think one issue to think about here is like to think yeah generally we tend to separate and say well output is really publications and patents and for scientists and engineers. But if you really think about output it is not just those two things but it's also networking and that's like part of your production of not just science but in many other positions. There we see some clear differences in the type of networks that say that white males might have and that women might have but part of that in a way I think it's is the way they go about building their network. I mean it's not like it's not determined that the social networks are the way they are. You can work on networking and that's where you see ment and to network more than the women do. And women don't have time to network. They might not. Yes. Working full time and taking care of families. Exactly. And those differences let's say are but that's where I think that if there's a change of incentives at the top the incentive to network might also change. And then you might if some cultural changes like the man who takes care of the kids at home you have more time you can start networking and then some of this difference is my my go away. Yeah let me mention that just these issues about how you evaluate competence and whether one can do it on objective criteria or not really was underlined for me this year because as vice dean for faculty and research I'm in charge of personnel issues. So I have to oversee all the tenure and promotion decisions. And we had this year two cases in the same department one white male one woman who happened to be European born who were both coming up for promotion. And our appointments and promotions committee raved about him and said you know this is such a clear case for someone who deserves promotion. And on her case there was they're saying they're not quite enough she's not really ready etc. They both had almost identical citations they had almost the same number of published papers in good journals if anything I think hers were were more over her career. She was on a major editorial board he was on an editorial board of a journal no one had ever heard of and yet this committee represented his editorial board membership as being on a journal which was not the one he was actually on. They simply substituted the name of a top journal instead of the one that actually he was on. And you know this kind of stuff happens all the time and if you don't have people who are paying attention to how these criteria get weighted and evaluated then you will reproduce these kinds of inequalities. I made first of all I sent the report back to the appointments and promotions committee and said you don't have the right name in the journal here and then I because as vice dean I got to write the dean's report of course I you know tried to write an equitable case now as it turns out he has been promoted we're still waiting to hear about her so. Can we get back to networking because I think there is a difference in networking as a woman and networking as a man. There's a no matter what if you're in a room full of people in the industry or whatever and as a woman you approach a man who's in power. There is a observation by people there's a sexual component to it there's all these other pressures and and things that go into it versus the guys hanging out in the back and being the guys and I think a lot of times I've heard a situations where men feel very uncomfortable just you know either having that dinner or networking or having that follow-up conversation or whatever and I think that in some sense that does hold women back in a way you disagree but I well it could also work the other way let's face it it can go either way but the whole point is is that networking I think is different for men and women and how you go about that and how it's perceived in everything else and I also think that in science maybe networking isn't everything and perception isn't everything but at least in the industries I've been in I would say that's 50 percent everybody's you know at different levels obviously it's going to be behind you know between you know two different people of kind of the same level but the perception and if this is someone that you can hang out with and go have a drink with after work and all these other dynamics play a huge part not not in what you're delivering it's extremely important again the research shows exactly what you're saying that networking is not the same for men and women and not the same for whites and non-whites essentially women and non-whites have to borrow social capital from white men yes in order to do as well but and it's also there are also some research to show that it is more difficult to have the kind of mentoring relationship between a female subordinate and a male superior because of this romance it looks like a date as opposed to a professional relationship yes and then all your colleagues are looking at it is that she's getting ahead not because she has merit and credence but because favors of favoritism and so it's very difficult to walk that balance which is partly why it's so important to have representation of women in the top level decision-making jobs as well because it helps mitigate that issue to some extent one of the key things that I found in the research that I did for my book which included detailed job histories for whites in several different parts of the country between ages of 25 and 55 I found that 70 percent of the jobs that people got over their lifetimes was because they got help from somebody because they got information other people didn't have they had influence used on their behalf or they had someone who actually could offer them a job or an opportunity so 70 percent of the time people had that kind of help and the jobs where you didn't have the help was as one of my interviewees said when one job is as bad as another you don't have to draw on social capital to get a job because you know anybody can get it but when I asked the people that I interviewed so what do you think most contributed to your having the kind of life you have now they all said because I worked hard because I was smart because I got an education because I did whatever so they although they actively drew from this kind of social connections they all individualized their success and thought they did it on their own I think that's another thing that's important is that women want to do it on their own I mean I know I was in an industry where my family well after the fact got very connected quit that job went to law school went were no one of my family is and I think that that's very important in terms of knowing and I'm not saying that I didn't have other things in my favor I mean I was well educated I came from a nice family you know I had other things going for me but I think that for women to get forward they need to believe in themselves and know why they got there there are plenty of women that I have heard from that are like well the only reason I got it is because my uncles you know whatever that never really kind of move forward or know their own worth or anything else because they just kind of relied on those wings I mean I think that's important for women to work on themselves I mean I do think there is a lot of work for women to do on themselves as well and there are conversations that we need to be having with each other and supporting each other and this goes back to my theory that nobody else really is but I think that there is a great resource in the in the in the workplace of women sharing with women and empowering other women and looking at you know the intelligence and the beauty and the and the potential and being happy for other women I think that is counterintuitive to most women most women are in a competitive they feel like it's them against someone else I know you disagree I am so stunned just because you're standing yes okay okay now I understand okay let me let me support your comment for a minute well she can support and research let me just say I'm not a research person I I prosecute cases I deal with people who kill people like I'm a homicide I have no research but I have everyday experience not as much as many people not as much but I also make the observations in the comments that I think a lot of people feel that nobody does make and nobody bothers to research this is a very uncomfortable area women don't want to hear they want to believe that women you know we're the victims we need to be empowered and okay no no but I'm saying I hear this a lot that we're somehow being repressed or this whether it be sex all of that is true but there is a great potential for women to get together and really embrace each other I'm sorry I actually asked a bunch of people at work this for a couple years I'm like what is the deal what is the deal in this office why can't we say instead of the catie remark can you believe this can you believe that can you believe the man she's networking with can you believe all of that is just contributing to the fact that we're not uplifting each other and I think it's a real problem that needs to be equally I so let me say first of all that I don't think in general that your observation is correct that in general I think the more representation of women and decision-making positions the better off other women in the organization will be and that well there may be the occasional catie remark I don't think that that's general representation of what happens when women enter the labor force but the place where there is some support for what you are observing can be found for example in work that Rosa Beth Moss-Cantar who's currently at Harvard did years ago where she was looking at the structure of women's jobs compared to the structure of men's jobs and she observed several different kinds of things first of all that women were more likely to be in jobs that had access to fewer resources than the jobs that men had and when you have access to fewer resources then you might hoard them and be less likely to share right and then the second thing she observed was that men's jobs were likely to be in the types of jobs that had ladders to better jobs whereas women's jobs were more likely to be in ladders that didn't go anywhere and so men had more opportunity and had links to those opportunities whereas women's jobs did not and then she also looked at the observation of the when women were in a minority that certain kinds of things happened in terms of how people address them like it tickly if there's only a very small proportion of women in the that work setting and she observed that particularly when there was a small group of women and it seemed that only a few women could get ahead then under those circumstances each woman might think that they're competing with the other one because only one will get the job it wasn't a general experience it's mostly men but occasionally a woman gets through and I'm going to be the one to do it so under those kinds of circumstances you may observe the kind of behavior that you're talking about but I don't think it's a general experience when you're talking about broader representation in the labor of the ballot because that's the working environment that you would see I've always experienced and that many women experience and I don't want to not have a voice or not have a way to express that because I'm in a particular area and I'm not the general I guarantee I'll never be in the general you know like it's just it's something that I think but even but even in law firms that there's some research by Robin Ealy from Harvard who looked at law firms and found that when there were more women partners then there's more chance that a woman will be hired in that firm compared to when there are no women partners even with women in lower level positions then I would agree there'll be different dynamics but don't you think it is a combination of things that result in a woman and not maybe not general but certainly specifically in women getting ahead that you do need people at some stage you may not realize it overtly as someone helping you and then the woman herself has to have a diversion or a passion for a particular application so it's a combination of someone who wants to do something and also someone who may want to help and most times women well in my own case it's been men who've helped me get along so that it doesn't necessarily need to be the one thing or the other well again most women will be helped by men because men are the decision makers disproportionately but with women in positions of decision making they are probably more likely to recognize and call to attention the issues of women's competence as well and women are likely to do well but that's the problem of really telling about that that effect is it's very hard right and because law firms let's say they have more women at the top are also law firms where the men are different from the law firms where there's only men at the top so it could be an effect for from both right well again the well not not just history I think that you could be a little more specific again there's lots of different ways that one could address it but the one that I think makes the most sense is again from what's called status construction theory or status expectations theory that finds that when resources are distributed unequally and overlaid with categorical differences among people like men versus women whites versus blacks and so on and so when you observe men always in positions that have more authority more income more training more education etc or whites in those kinds of positions then you come to assume that the people with the resources are the ones who are both competent and worthy and this sort of research let me just say because it sounds like it's just you know describing something that isn't real the research has not been done on men versus women or blacks versus whites it's done on artificially constructed groups artificially constructed categories like people might be called over estimators and under estimators or people that like Paul Clay versus people that like Picasso so the this social psychological research creates these distinctions and then give the people with these different distinctions different amounts of resources and then they evaluate how they evaluate each other and again they find that people with the most resources are the ones that are assumed to be more competent to be more worthy to get the benefit of the doubt and so on and so forth so even without real groups you just artificially create the groups you have this cognitive outcome because we have a tendency to want to think whatever is is right and therefore if those people are in charge it's because they should be in charge and again we do that to ourselves and there's the and that effect is multiplied by then let's say a young woman or a thinking of a career if they never see a woman in say in engineering they might assume that or they implicitly they might think that men are better that even though it's not true and and then again they don't get the proper training and then later on yeah they won't be qualified for those jobs and there is variation across countries these better models that if you have a good model let's say you have a mother who is working and successful that that will lead you also to as a woman to work and become successful the research does show that the research shows that women need to see other women in areas and that two things women need to see women in other areas so they have a whole lot of women in elementary school are being discouraged from owning into mass and sciences okay so Israel which is the most techy country world disciplines conference on and they had a representative from Israel and they didn't have enough women home arms and that women be that little bit but we didn't need to see the goal model we don't see the goal model we don't see how you do it we don't see what it's doing oh no no I agree I have a mother who's still working even though she should have retired a long time ago she'll work to the day she dies I have incredible women influences it work I gravitate towards women mentors and everything like that but most of the professional organizations I belong to right now but in a way some of us have counted that as a group of women we have gotten together yes we have been very helpful with each other yes we started a separate women's group wonderful non-same group that's a professional group that's partnered with the other group and we give good a woman will talk about her new idea we will live in but most of us are in the same profession I'm in the same profession with all these women I'm not competing right I have enough so you really have to be not going to get the support from the guys at the male dining professional organization I'm not going to change that culture I can create another culture right and I guess in my job that's what I'm trying to do and I've had these discussions over the years I'm in a very different kind of place but I've been in that different place in three different careers so I at least in my experience there are certain types of jobs where you know it's hard to get the women to get on the same page I had an office many years ago in Staten Island and I had to go to social functions and I was told that I quote instead of my men women don't talk to men men come up to talk to women so what I had to do was to work hard on many people that was very friendly we would talk to everybody but it was strictly business it was strictly business it was not an end if I had to have lunch with a guy to leave them lunch lunch and then I made a never to leave the women the wives so that the more things we get to know the agency because I don't understand the solution that women have to get together and create groups to counter men is that what the solution is? It's not the solution there are many solutions again solutions include collective behavior collective actions social movements public policy organizational policies and individual behavior there is some controversy if you will in terms of women in leadership roles should women simply have leadership development courses or should they have courses that are specifically for women in leadership and the research tends to show that both of those things help so it that you need different kinds of social support for example you need some people who will be instrumentally helpful who are going to help you with job opportunities and with knowledge about certain kinds of things happening in the profession and then you also need social support you need someone to validate your experience who is going to help you understand that it's not you that it's structurally related to factors like how women get treated versus how men get treated I mean one of the famous examples of that was the study of the scientist at MIT is that one of the women and I think she was in biology I'm trying to remember just got fed up one day with feeling somehow she wasn't getting the resources that she wanted and so she went around she measured physically measured everybody's office and then she to see how many square feet each of the scientists had in her area and she found the women had less square feet of office space than the men and she got together with other women scientists at MIT and they began to talk among themselves about well what's happening to you and what's happening to you and they were finding out they were having very common experiences which they didn't know because there was only one of them in each department right you know very small representation and then their efforts to put together some data to show that in fact they weren't being treated the same way the men were was facilitated by the fact that Lottie Baelin happened to be president of the faculty senate at that time who was someone who had done research on these kinds of issues and therefore she kind of fostered the attention to their concerns and then it went to the president of the university who then said well you know you're right we haven't been treating women the same and they started making some changes so that suggests you know individuals doing things groups offering social support having the right people and decision-making power who can influence decisions and you know at the right time it happened to be at MIT when they had the resources I guess to make some changes and then it spread across the country it somebody made Lottie I think made sure it got into the New York Times and then it was picked up by all kinds of you know other media publications and then other universities started saying well maybe we should look at you know what's happening to our women scientists and so on so you know it didn't change everything but it had an impact but ultimately to really reach parity let's say in talk the men have to be on board otherwise it's it's just not going to happen right it and coming down to issues about perception of the jobs and family issues if men don't pick up the taking care of the kids it would be impossible for for women to be in this really competitive profession so well men aren't taking care of the kids other women are taking care of the kids for the most part right but that's what I mean they need to fully participate eventually you need to get the men on board also because what you don't want I think it's a mistake is is to try to fix it but making women look like men and to me that's a little self-defeating because then it's just gonna destroy the diversity and the good things of having both men and women in top positions is that they are different they think different otherwise we will have parity maybe at some point but they'll be all acting like men and that's not necessarily a good thing like to go back to some of your points men tend to be overconfident that's not good I mean it might promote them in their careers but they're making their wrong decisions yes it's pretend but I open it up for questions you have a comment on the question of science there was a panel discussion here a couple weeks ago and that on women in science and they mentioned studies where papers were submitted to journals or for grants and they had women's names or men's names on the paper and there was clear discrimination in terms of just what names were on the paper also my question has to do with how much does the fact that you know as was mentioned that the responsibility for having and raising children aren't isn't shared equally responsible for the problems and I wonder I've read that if you look at single women without children that their salaries are the same as men there isn't discrimination is that true or no no no what's the difference how much is it is it you know the 23% they always I don't remember the exact data but at every point of comparison you will still find that when you control for full-time work weeks worked type of job type of occupation and so on that men are going to make more and that's true whether you're talking about single women or women with children it tends to be the case that for each additional child women pay a penalty in terms of salary and such in the workforce but even single women tend to be disadvantaged compared to men even male nurses make more money than female nurses and so on so even in overwhelmingly female dominated positions men still benefit but not yes and you know that there was some effort to say that you know between the ages of 25 and something rather than there was parity but it that's a very narrow thing and the gap widens over time but but not to say that it's not a very important component it is not a very important component that the gap is true that there there's still a gap once you account for these things but these things account for a lot of the gap of the gap. Well job segregation accounts for the most and then years of experience and then and then the evaluation of women's work versus men's work and so on. I was going to mention this lady mentioned Abrams and the big case now at the New York Times is really serious to look at because we're talking about salaries of five hundred something thousand dollars and over uh Salzberger actually hired this person himself this is the person he fired and she'd been with this paper for many many years and many important managerial positions. He was upset because she realized and did her research about how much the former person in her CEO position got and when she was the managerial position lower one how much money she was she was losing and also she had in her job description and her responsibilities the right to put a new person on as a co-manager or take somebody off the judgment is not about the work the judgment is about brusque or indiscriminate or insensitive or something like that they don't use that with men when they making the decisions so when she came to the boss's office with an attorney he was in shock how did she dare come to him with an attorney why did she talk to him because she did her homework and when they responded I don't know if you read this this whole case when they responded the answer was you're not making seventy five thousand dollars less when the original salary when we offered you was five hundred five and then when you said this one was getting five ninety five we gave you five five thirty five and you agreed because we gave you perks and they made they showed how all these perks were equal to the men's salary that was a straight salary and maybe he got the perks too I don't know but the point is it was the hutzpah of her coming to his office with a lawyer having the research having the evidence having the facts and saying this is not equal and she was fired now that was the big report you can look at it in in on your internet and see a lot of different responses to this but this is a case to watch because it's a matter of turf you mentioned the floor space that's not that's not just segregated to women architects have been told top-down hierarchy the CEO will get this this one will get back this one however window this chair will be higher than this one so when he sits in the guy is lower it's very psychological we're in a psychological institute there are a lot of games that were written there's a book from Harvard remember the games mother the game then the toll is to play games mother never told me we don't have the bag of tools we should have them by now I mean for Dan did her book a long time ago no these books are all old books the problem is the culture no I'm just saying the problem is the culture the women who were younger don't understand the struggle that was done for them they take it for granted and we don't have the same force so the women that you want to sit around say oh I don't need that I don't need that that's very good for them right women need to stay together and they have to help each other on every single level to reinforce that particular case there's been some studies of women on Wall Street and again it's exactly the same thing women may be making a million dollars but they're not making three and so in every point where there's a comparison men end up making more there was recently a study that was released about a year so I'll go by catalyst which is you know the research organization that studies women in the workforce particularly in management and boards of directors in which they looked at I think was 4,000 MBAs from all kinds of universities from different parts of the world and they looked at you know controlling for issues of child care and full-time work and type of job and so on that women start out in their very first job making less and then it just grows over the career and we're talking about people with MBAs you know same it just actually the gap is bigger at the top right so yeah it grows over time particularly after 10 years that brings up a point what what impact does the equal pay law which was passed in the 1963 or 1965 because that seems to be ignored throughout the whole country so what what does it mean anything that that kind of legislation like like the Civil Rights Act I mean like the Civil Rights Act it depends on someone bringing a lawsuit it depends on showing that people are in similarly situated positions and that they have similar kinds of qualifications etc it's very hard to use that kind of law to lead to equitable outcomes and for the most part again you know the data that I talked about for the Civil Rights Act we assume because the legislation is there the outcomes will follow that simply is not the case well does that mean that the law needs to be more specific I mean how else that's exactly what groups are now lobbying for an equal pay act but there is already that one in place well what a lot how are they going to change it what they're lobbying for currently has to do with the right to have the knowledge of the it's the exposure public like in government obviously everything of us is public record yeah I like that because I know that the guy sitting next to me is my and you know that's good but you don't have that in most professions and I think part of the problem and I I hate feeling like a woman I'm a bargaining chip it's almost as like you get the promotion women get so excited they don't they forget to ask well wait a second you know I feel so honored I'm so oh my gosh me okay great this is so great and then they forget to do the the research and and then they don't have the hoodspend everything else I really do believe all of these salaries and last it's just like a house to get sold you know how much is sold for the last time so what's the job for you know going out I deserve that and it's a question that should be asked and we shouldn't be afraid to ask it we shouldn't be so taken aback by the fact that we've been selected women don't negotiate they don't ask well negotiation if they do ask they get left and they're afraid that they're not and I think because we've been taught this way we're afraid that all of a sudden people are going to like us we're not going to look like we're appreciative hopefully you would go back to your professional organization and then start talking to some of the older women yes mentoring in that and they will be helpful so that each one goes back so I'm with people in my field and I talked to them about presentation doing seminar and asking for money and hopefully your whole profession you would go to some people and they would mentor you and all right this is what you have you know this the problem is that you are talking that we can't record so if you want to say something you're not the alternator yes right oh I forgot to say something there are certain areas that have protected women that can't have gender or sexism or ages and that much as anything else and that are those are places where you have unions like in the theater you have a part you have six women come up for the part one gets the part it has nothing to do with it's her talent her reading or whatever and the guy gets the guys part but there's less women parts after an equity and all these other unions and health benefits it has nothing to do with anything else they had a breakthrough the racism part of it full Latinos and blacks and so on but they they did work through it they had little clutches and people work together then you have also an academia you have all this business and publish or perish and all that stuff but it works for the men same as the women but it's a little harder for the women because even if they're senior the men get into the men's bathroom and they have all these discussions by the time you're getting into the meeting the meeting took place in the bathroom you're just you're just hearing the results so very hip women who are vp's in different areas in corporate areas have figured out that's usually the bar of the bus the decisions were already made that's what the people come in in a morning there are showers in the men's bathroom there are no showers in the women's bathrooms they're coming in the middle so the meeting takes place there and they get they get there and they make their decision is always random but there are some women who already are too smart a notice because they read some of those books from way back now so what what is okay one is that okay one last one last one example of one woman who took it on straight on she had big budget had a lot of airline tickets that she used and she called up and wanted a bp she wanted her her um superior she wanted the same ticket that they had for the men and bp's because she was flying all over the european in the United States and so on that she had great these people whithering set up the lectures so they said oh we can't choose to point them out i'm not a vice president in charge of this watching i run the advertising department what do you mean why not you wouldn't give it you said you have three minutes to do what before i call up glorious thine i'm harry at van horn and and all these famous people of those days with darthi klegal and and i'm not using your airline and i'm sending these back guess what she got it she said i don't need cigars i don't need first class i want you to hold a plane for me if i'm late the way you do with the guys i love that apropos i can i i am such a case in point you can do all the statistics on me my brother told the family that when he was 16 years old he went there was an ad for um you can fly anywhere for 25 dollars and uh and if they're flan if the plane is full will give you your own plane i don't remember this he said he went to laguardia airport he was 16 he waited for four hours till the plane was full and then he was the next one and he said i want my own plane i want you to know my brother's a very very successful man it starts when you're little it has to do with yourself image and mommy darling mommy said to me i'll never forget this your brother needs the bigger room he has more stuff i'd like to know what that stuff is i want some of that stuff fortunately you know i i realized at a very young age i've got stuff too it may not be in a penis it's maybe up here my stuff is up here and i'm going to use it and i made damn sure i married a man who respected yes my head and i told freddy freddy is my boss i work for freddy he's an artist i said freddy everything in my life is a negotiation i negotiate for a cup of coffee i want that coffee i want it the way i want it harry said to me and i i write that's what i do unpolished if you weren't such a good god damn writer i would have made you stay as a teacher and i left teaching 30 years ago to write for the drawer if you know what that means in russia people who are writing controversial stuff don't get published they write for the drawer i'm your writer for the drawer hi my name is mary mr and i'm also an attorney so i'm not a researcher but i have a lot of anecdotal feelings about some of the things said you have to hold the mic close to me okay um very mr and attorney so i'm not a researcher i have anecdotal feelings about some of the things said and professor did a mess so i thank you so much for all the research that you mentioned today and i so agree with everything feeling it um i just want to comment about what was said about theater because i'm an entertainment lawyer also an adjunct professor at several universities here in the city teaching business law and law to filmmakers there is tremendous prejudice in the theater industry there are hardly any female writers that are being produced there are hardly any female directors that are being hired you can count them on one hand same in the film industry and in terms of academia i totally agree with everything you've said and again anecdotally as a lawyer i've read that two percent of females ever make partner so there are no females up there to support other females any other questions? yeah i'm pram dylan um i wanted to go back to implicit bias um i had an experience this morning with a visiting transplant surgeon she she was i guess one of 40 who were here in new york at the new york academy of medicine and i guess at the opening meeting she was um sitting at a table with other surgeons and they were introducing the people at the table and they came to her and said she's the coordinator and um she was shocked of course but she's one of the few i think transplant surgeons in the country um so i was interested in different sectors what's happening in different sectors sectors particularly medicine but i said to her what did you say and she said well i said i'm a surgeon and and after that she said i didn't say anything else um so i just wonder about the language to deal with that implicit bias because i think women don't have the language to deal with it and um she you know she really needed that she's in her 40s and she will go to meetings over and over again like this and so i'd love your comment right well i think again anytime one is an only in a profession or in a group you're going to have these experiences over and over again because people will form prototypes in their head about who should be in this kind of profession and it'll be like those that are in the majority um but let me mention two things that i think we haven't addressed yet and that might be useful and for the conversation one is that while all of the kinds of things that we've been discussing are true in terms of the research that has looked at the issues uh women get paid less women are less likely to be in positions of authority women are less likely to be taken seriously and so on but some women do make it and that's one of the things that we do need to keep in mind allis eagerly and i think linda carly did a book called the labyrinth of leadership where they argued that we have the wrong imagery to talk about the glass ceiling and somehow think that everything's just fine until women get to the top and then they get stopped because they argue that these kinds of things take place at every point along the way but it isn't simply um a straight shot that when women run into obstacles they can go around them they can find another pathway and that's why they called it the labyrinth of leadership that there are ways to uh manage to overcome the obstacles despite discrimination despite the favoritism that that men enjoy um and part of that is persistence part of it is good luck part of it is skill um but knowing that there are examples of people who have somehow done it against the odds i think is something to be sure that we remember and to be encouraged by one of the uh things i think along those lines to keep in mind uh that i teach in my classes when i teach them um is that one shouldn't get caught up in that double bind about trying to act competent versus act nice um or trying to do it like a man versus doing it like a woman that essentially you can't win in that kind of a trade-off hillary clinton can't do it because you know someone will always think that she's if she uh is acts too feminine she's being inauthentic and if she doesn't act feminine enough she's you know uh not someone to be admired and so on so um robin ealy uh again at harvard and uh her collaborator whose name i'm debra rodie talk about opting out of that effort to balance between doing it like man versus doing it like woman and instead focus on the goal of performance and learning your job and looking for opportunity and um doing it in a way that engages and involves other people and helps them develop their capacities and their ability to win and when you keep the focus on what you're trying to accomplish and uh how you're going to get there and go around the obstacles as opposed to be stopped by them you have a much greater opportunity to not be undone by these kinds of experiences um this has been a really interesting conversation and i'm just curious how you would see women and the world of work against what i consider the greater context which is the american culture i'm very interested in say the demise of the women's movement that i grew up with and the role models that i had in the 70s like the glorious dynams and you know that whole there were magazines there were movements they were very very public voices who were inspirational and they were role models for us that seems to have imploded or fizzled out um the role models we see now the oprah winfrees are more concerned about celebrity or very soft subjects like i don't know spirituality is not soft but oh um so there seems to be to me a lack of cohes a cohesive movement and leadership i see not to diss Michelle Obama but she's talking about not women's work but you know eating habits um the other thing the concomitant trend that i've seen we've all seen over the last say 20 years is this hyper sexualization of american women american society so that men and women seem farther apart in tv in movies in music i mean the the sexual images to me are shocking you know and stoning somebody who grew up in the 70s and i'm wondering whether the push for equality on the job front is made more difficult by these cultural and social trends i mean we're kind of fighting against you know a wave that's pushing us back so any comments you would have on that i would be interested okay i'll comment um well well it is the case that many of the social movements that some of us grew up with have dissipated i mean there's a certain sense in which you know people have gotten older they had to go in other directions there became uh you know some downsides of being involved in some of those kinds of things but i think that to some extent the energy from those social movements got professionalized i mean there were or you know professional organizations that got created as opposed to just social movements so i don't think that the pressure for change has necessarily disappeared but it's taken a different form however at the same time that those kinds of things have happened there has been an organized effort to turn the country back from liberalism uh that has been driven by a very well financed right wing movement i talk about this in my book as well and um they have had a strategy for doing that that included creating public intellectuals and generating books and capturing the media and the development of fox news and uh all kinds of organizations to sort of create model legislation and and many many kinds of uh sectors of the uh society have been influenced by this effort to turn the country back from those social movements so obviously one of the solutions would be to sort of recreate some aspect of those social movements but it's a very difficult thing to do uh particularly because the supreme court and the finance you know the campaign finance laws and so on so unfortunately uh as the successes of those social movements have begun to erode um the new generation of people and i guess to some extent some of us as well sort of have to fight those battles again and um you know the that's sort of an unsettling sort of thing to me you know i was very happy for those social movements and glad that i didn't have to be as involved as some people needed to be but um you know i do feel committed to supporting what other kind of efforts sort of emerged to sort of take things back again if there are no other questions we will finish stop here thank you thank you well