Madner Sesien, thank you for coming.
I will briefly give you an introduction to the people at the round table and then we
will get going.
Marit Delosier is sitting there.
She's lawyer and assistant attorney, district attorney in New York City.
Prior to becoming a prosecutor, she clerked for the DC Court of Appeals and also served
as Special Legal Counsel to the Senate Judiciary Committee on the nomination of Supreme Court
Chief Justice John Roberts.
Prior to becoming a lawyer, she enjoyed the career in media after graduating from Northwestern
University.
Professor Nancy DeMosso is sitting there.
She is the Vice Dean for Faculty and Research and Professor of Management and Global Business
at Rutgers Business School.
Her research specialties include the management of diversity and change, the management of
knowledge-based organizations and the management of scientists and engineers.
She has co-authored and co-edited five books and has had articles published in many journals.
Her recent book is the American Nondilemma and is available from the Russell Sage Foundation.
Sorry, and on the table.
She has been elected to several national offices in various professional associations, including
a position on the American Sociological Association Council as chair of the Organizations and
Occupational Section of the ASA and as president of the Society for the Advancement of Socioeconomics.
Ernesto Rubin is Associate Assistant Professor at Columbia Business School.
Well, it says Assistant One Place Associate One Place and one is, oh, your Associate Professor
of Management Columbia Business School.
Assistant Professor.
At Columbia Business School.
Yes.
Okay.
His research interests live within behavior and public economics.
He investigates the role played by social norms and particular psychological traits on
activities that are economically relevant for public policy and business strategy.
More recently, he's been working on the role of reciprocity in the interaction between
special interest groups and politicians, the effect of present bias preferences on procrastination,
and how implicit associations can lead to biased expectations and discrimination.
Ernesto has taught courses in public economics, microeconomics, experimental economics, statistic
and strategy at numerous universities.
Patricia Taylor, who is married to Kenneth Taylor, the former Canadian Ambassador to Iran
who's sitting back there.
She has followed her husband on many of his assignments and therefore has held positions
at various cities around the world.
Guatemala City, Detroit, Karachi, London, Tehran and New York.
In Ottawa, she was head of the National Hepatitis Reference Laboratory and became chief of the
Virus Diagnostic Services Division.
She has held a number of research fellowships and scholarships including international
fellowship from the American Association of University Women, Fulbright and Rockefeller
Foundation grants and served on several Canadian U.S. and World Health Organization, Public
Health and Expert Scientific Advisory Committees.
She's a member of the Order of Canada and has honorary doctors of the Doctor of Law from
St. Francis Xavier University.
Her awards include Women of the Year from the Canadian Women's Club, the Harry Edmund
Award for Lifetime Achievement from International House New York.
She was a violinist with the Universities of Queensland and California Orchestra and
danced with ballet companies in Australia, Guatemala and California.
She currently serves as the chair of the Women's International Leadership Advisory Council
of I House New York.
International House New York.
Thank you.
We can just get going.
Well, I feel humbled.
So I'm going to let one of y'all start.
Well, you know, what puzzles me continuously in traveling around the world is that the
United States seems to be out of step with many countries, other countries in the world,
such as the Nordic countries where there is a high employment rate amongst women.
So what comments might you have on that?
Well, I attended a conference recently where one of the participants addressed that issue
and mentioned that some of the social democratic policies that have affected women in the workforce
in the Nordic countries essentially emerged when some of the Nordic countries were concerned
about the influence of immigrants on their economy.
So essentially, some of those policies emerged essentially to keep the labor force more Swedish
or Norwegian or whatever.
So while we can look at those policies and admire them, I think that it reminds us that
for any kind of assessment of what's happening to women in the labor force or women in the
workforce or women in social relationships in general, that we have to look at a number
of different factors.
We have to look at the social, the legal, the economic, the behavioral, the psychological.
Since, by training, I'm a sociologist and do study diversity in the labor force, including
race, ethnicity, gender, and other kinds of differences.
I did, I'm fairly familiar with the, at least the research findings for the US, not as much
the research findings around the world, although when we're talking about women in the labor
force, particularly in advanced countries, it looks pretty much the same.
So let me just mention a couple things and then maybe that can spark some of the conversation.
There's a very good book that just came out fairly recently called Documenting De-Segregation
that analyzed the data from the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission from 1966 through 2005
and looking particularly at the issues of what has happened since the passage of the
civil rights movement to segregation for various kinds of groups from white men in the labor
force in the US.
And the big story there is that much less has changed than we probably assume.
The biggest story of the stories in that book is that essentially white men have retained
their access to the best jobs at the same proportion that they had when the civil rights
movement was passed and in some cases in some types of occupations and industries they've
actually enhanced their access to those types of jobs.
So that the access for women of various types and minorities in the labor force have both
basically come from growth of jobs at the lower end of the distribution in terms of
authority income, etc. or in the public sector because these data are all for private sector
organizations.
The second finding was that although there was a slight decline in the segregation between
white men and black men from about 1966 to about 1980, small change.
Something has happened since 1980.
It's basically been flat in terms of the desegregation of black men from white men.
The desegregation of black women from white men never changed much.
It was very high.
It stayed very high.
Slight, slight shift but basically no change.
For white women from white men there has been somewhat more of a change.
It was slow to start.
It accelerated a bit through the 70s and 80s but basically trailed off about 2000 and has
not changed much since then.
While some white women have entered jobs that previously were held only by white men, it
has contributed to a resegregation between white women and black women in terms of the
jobs that they hold.
But even with the advances that white women have made in the labor force, essentially
they are now almost at parity with black men in terms of the proportion working in the
same jobs as white men.
Even if you look only at managerial jobs, again white men's over representation has
been absolutely not changed since the civil rights movement.
In other words, under representation has declined to some extent but again they are
still almost but not quite at the level of their representation in the labor force.
Black men and black women, there has been almost no change in terms of their representation
in managerial jobs.
Professional jobs, same story although white women doing slightly better in terms of their
representation and in craft jobs, essentially same story.
So white men still dominate the best jobs.
Over the last 50 years there has been advances for white women.
There have been modest changes for black men and black women but not much for the last
35 years since about 1980.
So I think that that's something to keep in mind when we're talking about what is happening
and why those dynamics haven't changed more than we would anticipate it.
That deals with the situation as it is.
It doesn't deal with why that situation has become so.
Why do white men still dominate those managerial positions?
Well, I do have an answer for that.
Let me give mine very quickly and then I'll turn it over to others.
The book that is sitting on the table out there that I recently published is really focused
on racial inequality but I think it is related to issues of gender inequality as well.
So my explanation for why there hasn't been more change in terms of equality in general
since the passage of the civil rights movement is because all of the focus has been on issues
of discrimination and racism or sexism.
Essentially framing everything in a negative way.
What bad things whites do toward blacks or what bad things men do toward women.
So again discrimination, racism, sexism.
But I think in the post civil rights period and it affects women as well as racial minorities,
but most of the action has been in terms of whites helping each other, whites helping
other whites or men helping other men.
And those kinds of things are not illegal.
Discrimination is illegal but giving favor to people who are like you is not illegal.
So while some public policy issues have focused on the discrimination against women, there's
been very little attention on how men keep hiring other men and promoting them and paying
them more and so on.
And same thing in terms of whites hiring other whites and giving them higher salaries and
more authority and better jobs and more promotions and so on.
Let me just add to that that I think there is something that everybody continues to neglect.
And that's the women that hurt other women.
It is a huge issue that I've seen in the workplace.
Not where I work now, but I'm just saying in general with people, I remember in 1998 Gloria
Steinem was speaking at Union Square and I was younger then.
And I had read Revolution from Within, I had been working at ABC Television and I was the
last person who got to ask a question and she was launching a new magazine.
You know, just kind of about a lot of these different issues and women in the workplace
and things like that.
And I raised my hand and I said, with all due respect, you prepared me in how I could
choose to deal with discrimination, sexism, all these things.
I feel like I've been given a voice as someone who's going forward in my career.
What we haven't addressed is the fact that I think women in many respects are our own
worst enemies at work.
I think the fact remains that part of the sexism and things like that is the perception
that women are highly emotional, that they get into these other dialogues that have
nothing to do with the work at hand.
They are more inclined to suck up to men thinking that that will give them an advantage rather
than promoting the woman sitting next to them that is equally intelligent and qualified.
And until women start embracing other women in the workplace, they're all pitted against
each other.
So what does that mean?
No one supports each other so that if a second job comes up, that person has pretty much
been tarnished in a certain way and a man is free to get on in that spot.
I mean, this is just a theory I have from watching and learning and talking to people,
and I think it's something that people are forgetting to address and is incredibly important.
So I think that as women, we do have to take some responsibility as well.
That's actually very consistent with the research on discrimination, which doesn't necessarily
show that women are worse than or are tougher than other women, but they certainly don't,
let's say, help.
So both men and women tend to discriminate at the similar rates when it comes to promotions
and things like this.
And the reasons for that, I mean, there could be many, but it's certainly something that
you see.
You don't see a very strong favor.
It is between women.
This is for top jobs.
And that's a very important point to make, that there's been enormous strides in labor
for participation and things like this, but it's important to think of the role of women
in the labor force, not just overall, but thinking of the top positions where the situation
looks very different, where there hasn't been as much progress, and coming somewhat to
this point about different countries, these can actually vary a lot.
So some countries that might look very well on overall statistics, actually for the top
jobs might not look so well.
And it's not necessarily the same type of policies that would help women get promoted
to the top jobs than the ones that would help just women go out and get some job.
So that's something that still needs to learn more about.
Other countries, for example, like the Netherlands has great statistics when it comes to labor
for participation.
And so that's driven by a lot of part-time work.
It's driven by a lot of work at lower positions.
So in top positions, you see a lot of discrimination.
So it varies a lot.
I thought you were going to go somewhere else in response to the comments.
And I'm not sure I agree with you, and I'm not sure the data support, what you've just
said.
But with a couple caveats.
It is the case that men and women, whites and blacks are, for the most part, similarly
affected by the cultural messages and experiences that we all have.
So for example, when the distribution of resources overlays categorical differences.
So for example, most CEOs are white men.
And then cognitively, when we see that over and over again, we come to assume cognitively
that the people in those kinds of positions deserve to have them.
That's called status expectations theory.
And it's been demonstrated in a number of different ways.
So those kinds of messages we all share.
And if you look at implicit associations or implicit association tests, men and women
are so similarly affected by those kinds of messages.
But it isn't the case, I think, that having the representation of women in higher level
jobs wouldn't be beneficial in terms of hiring more women in general.
In fact, I think that there is some research that showed at least limited research that
when women, for example, in law firms, if women are represented in top level positions
in law firms, then they're more likely to hire other women in those firms compared to
men.
But where I thought you were going is what's called the double bind for women, which is
that because of these cognitive associations in our heads, we associate being a good manager,
being a good leader with being a male.
And so when we think manager, we think male.
And so women who enact the behaviors that we think of as being a good manager or a good
leader are thought of as not being sufficiently female or feminine in their behavior.
And so they're thought of as competent but not nice.
And if they enact the more feminine role of being emotional and nice and caring and so
on, then their thought about as being nice but not competent.
And that trade-off doesn't exist for men.
Men can be both competent and nice.
In fact, they are thought of as that way when they're in top leadership positions, but it
isn't the case for women.
So if women face that double bind and they are having to walk that narrow line, then
their behaviors in those roles may be somewhat different than men because women are having
to address other kinds of issues about how they're perceived and how they get evaluated.
So even they may be subject to those kinds of messages.
So if they are in a position to select someone for a job, they also may perceive a woman
as being competent but not nice or nice but not competent and also feel that they should
hire the man because he seems to have the traits that are the whole package.
The whole package, right.
But visiting that, how do you change that sort of cognitive perception that you have?
To me, that sort of change would take more than a generation, take several generations
of thinking in that way.
So it's a very difficult situation.
Well, I've had that question addressed particularly with regard to my book on racial inequality
a lot.
So what do you do if whites help other whites?
And they act with favor toward other whites and it's not really discrimination and racism.
Well the first answer to that is it's not an individual solution.
It's not something that you can do simply by changing your own behavior.
It's really a collective solution.
It's a public policy solution.
It's a social movement solution.
But short of that, you can also have organizational policies that change if organizations have
more accountability for the kinds of decisions that get made.
That can make a difference.
And then individual people can make a difference.
But to do so, they can't just try to be better.
The research tends to show that they have to be explicit about these cultural biases
that they hold and make them salient.
And when they do that, they're less likely to enact the kind of cultural biases that
would lead to giving favor to men over women.
So those are some of the kinds of things that could be done.
One thing that's not emphasized enough I think is a lot of this is put in a way that seems
to be like we should favor women in some way.
And organizations you can think they don't want to do that because they might be worried
that you will hurt their performance, that they will be just a political correctness type
of thing.
And it should be much more emphasized that that's not the case.
That actually even unknowingly if your organization, this favoritism or some sort of discrimination,
you are actually hurting your organization because you're not promoting the most qualified
people.
And that message should be out there so that let's say men, which are the ones that hold
now the top positions, start to worry more about and say we should actually worry about
these associations, these stereotypes that exist about what is a good leader.
And so we try to be much more objective about there's lots of evidence that show that women
perform equally if not better sometimes that men in many, many managerial positions but
the stereotype might still be that the man is the, or the qualities that are associated
with men are the ones that you want as leaders which is not necessarily the case.
But if we come back to the differences between the United States and for example will take
the Nordic countries.
Aren't there policies in those countries that the United States or women as a whole strive
towards for instance the type of leave they have, the existence of public funded daycare
centers and things of that nature.
Yeah certainly those kinds of policies make a huge difference is that in the Nordic countries
and in Europe more so than in the US or England I guess.
Having paid childcare for some period of time makes it easier to manage the work family
issues than the other, you know they have similar laws about non-discrimination and
so on but give more support for women who might have responsibility for children and
families or elder care and so on.
The other thing that I believe the Nordic countries have done, I don't know for sure
but I know some European countries and I think it's the Nordic countries have mandated a
certain proportion of representation on their boards of directors.
That's right.
I think 30%.
40%.
So the assumption there is that if you have representation of women in these positions
that then the policies in the firms will be less likely to be discriminatory or at least
will be more likely to be fair and the research on those kinds of issues of which there is
some emerging tend to show that there isn't a direct clear relationship between that kind
of representation and better performance but at least there is no evidence to suggest
that that kind of representation leads to lesser performance.
So it's not the case that's coming.
The changes are a little very recent so you would expect that at the beginning there might
be a shorter qualified woman to fill all these positions because the demand didn't exist
and now as years pass and then more and more women get.
There is something that let's say I see in my research or what I'm interested in my research
is this idea that if you think you're not going to be promoted you're not going to
work as hard to get those promotions.
So differences that look like maybe the man looks like he's performing a little bit better
was because he has better incentives to work hard.
Like this idea with the boards if suddenly you know that 40% of the board will be female
now there's going to be some woman that will start to think and say well if I want to be
a member of the board I need to do this five things and then get the necessary qualifications
and as this happens then my hope or my prediction will be that performance will get better after
you get enough qualified women.
But the comment that you made about if you think you're not going to be promoted you
don't work as hard is an anthema to a woman's ability to be promoted isn't promotion dependent
on performance so if you don't perform well then you're not going to get promoted.
It's a cycle right and that's the problem this is why it's so hard to break because if you
think you're not going to get promoted you're not going to work as hard so then you're not
going to get promoted because you're not as good as the equivalent male but you cannot
change only one side you cannot you need to change both sides for this to break the
conversation makes it sound like promotions and other kinds of choices like this are based
on merit and we know that is not the case that it is centrally based on who knows or supports
or is sponsoring whom and the fact that there are any number of people who might be thought
of as qualified so it's not the best person it's the one who has the right connections
the right people the right place in the right time and in general if white men are in the
decision making positions they will tend to hire other white men or promote them or give
them raises and so on and that's that's true actually throughout the labor force not just
at the top and it's very consequential let me give you an example that was very interesting
to me about a year and a half ago I was invited to attend a conference that was sponsored
by a major company fortune 100 company that wanted to have business school faculty do
a better job of admitting and training and graduating minority students because they
wanted to be able to hire them and they thought if they could influence the faculty they would
do a better job with the students so the CEO of this company came to this little conference
of about 30 people and gave an impassioned plea about the importance of diversity to
the survival of his firm he said that like many firms 75 percent of their profits and
the growth of the company was coming from outside the United States he said that people
had to learn to work with people whose names they couldn't pronounce and that in general
that the firm would not survive if middle management didn't become more representative of the
world and so on and so in this discussion I posed to him the issue about implicit bias
that so many people have heard about about unconscious bias the fact that we have these
cognitive messages in our heads he knew all about that he had brought one of the key researchers
from Harvard into talk to the top management of the firm he knew all about trying to get
rid of implicit bias and yet at dinner that night I learned from one of the HR directors
that that firm rewarded people in the company who recommended people they later hired so
he was supposedly wanted to increase the diversity of middle management but middle management
was disproportionately white men and so if they recommended people it was going to be
other white men and so his whole framework about bias was bias against he wanted to get
rid of the bias against people and gave no attention to the fact that in his firm continually
there was bias for whites hiring other whites and so he thought the survival of his firm
depended on having a more diverse labor force and yet they had policies in this firm which
were reproducing the system labor force. If I can also go back to the comment about a
woman who perceives rightly or wrongly that someone a male white male black male even
just a male is going to be promoted so they kind of just laws that become laws like there
I have to disagree I feel like there are a lot of women that work even harder when they
see that situation I feel like that's been our MO is that we have to to prove ourselves
and everything else but we're still not getting that job or that managerial position or that
CEO level you know I think that it's a real problem when people perceive women is giving
up or just going to accept the status quo because I really don't know any woman that
does that on any level willingly there's a difference in how they've been raised or the
values or their own self-esteem and I think self-esteem does play in a immense role in
this as well I think in those situations that you're talking about a lot of women because
they've either been rejected or they feel like they've been passed up or whatever their
self-esteem becomes smaller and smaller and so they don't demand what they deserve and
I don't think that's addressed men don't seem to engage in these same types of dialogues
at least in the people that I've observed if anything their ego is often inflated it's
true and so they don't they don't second guess themselves all the time I mean I speak
when at least in my line of work women are always coming back and kind of second guessing
one so I have right that it is like this perfectionist thing and men are just kind of like it is
what it is let's move on what's the next witness you know it's it's like this thing and I think
some of that is based on how we're groomed to to think about ourselves as women and I
also want to get back to the point I think you mean an excellent excellent observation
I'm just curious how you all would view yourselves in your work careers are you the nice incompetent
one or you the one who's um can I swear bitch from hell but like gets it done like
you know I'm just curious and where has that gone for you because I can say it for me
I've grown I used to start out in pantsuits and things like that being kind of what I perceived
you know was the right track and then I said you know what I'm a woman and like I'm gonna
wear makeup and I'm gonna you know wear heels and I'm gonna you know not wear hose sometimes in
court and I'm gonna wear pink I'm gonna wear blue I'm gonna be who I am and I've seen how that's
worn out for me I'm just curious if either one of you has ever identified with one of those
I just want to raise a point about something you said that we all know that you're not promoted
because of what you do it's who you know and that that's generalizing though because there are
situations well there are a lot of situations and they are careers for instance in science
that's promotion depends on what you have achieved your ability to do it good or bad
positive or negative and it doesn't depend at all on who you might know in the department
and I know that because we have traveled so much and I have gone to various institutes
oftentimes not knowing anyone at all and it's only on a CV that your position and your salary
is estimated it doesn't depend on who you know or
that's that's a wonderful that's a wonderful setup for my response because of course a lot
of the research I've done are on scientists and engineers and my research does not show
what you have just said I did a study of 24 major multi-billion dollar US companies in different
parts of the country with 3200 scientists and engineers and we had data on their career experiences
and then we also had the evaluation of their managers and in the analyses that we did
we looked at two different kinds of outcomes one was their evaluation as being innovative
which is a key thing for scientists and engineers and the other thing was their evaluation
as promotable into management and among other factors controlling for all the kinds of things
that you think you should control for we looked at their access to favorable work experiences
which in science and engineering is being able to choose your own work as opposed to having
someone assign it to you and we found in that analysis that US-born white men were more likely
than other groups to be able to choose their own work and what's called access to technical
control and then over and above their access to these favorable work experiences they also got
higher evaluations on innovativeness and higher evaluations on promoted,
promoted into management, net of patents, net of publications, net of their education,
net of their years of experience so essentially US-born white men were getting the benefit of the doubt
and they were getting favorable experiences that affected their evaluation as being more
qualified and then also more likely to be promoted into management so even in science and engineering
where you think that there's a very hardened fast kind of measurement of merit they're simply
isn't and certainly in any university that is quite evident you can take any one's qualifications
and they can be interpreted in a number of different ways I've been on the faculty for
I think about 40 years now I've been tenured for a long time set on many many personnel committees
and the bar gets raised or lowered depending on who the candidate is and who in the room wants to
be favorable toward that person and you can fight against it and you can raise all kinds of questions
about merit but you know you can't finesse zero if the person has done nothing then you can't do
much but no one for the most part is in that situation everyone has done something and then
depending on whose friends with whom the case can get presented as the best things in sliced
bread or it can be sort of just not good enough you know needs to go somewhere else because
it doesn't meet our standards I suppose the difference is the type of science that you're
in you're involved in because I was in biological science and the fact that I never
aspired to a management role in fact I couldn't because we moved so much but certainly my CV
or curriculum VITA made a difference and the papers I'd published and the research that I had done
did contribute towards the position that I was able to get.
Yeah that's true for everyone certainly patents and publications had a positive effect but the
issue is net of that controlling for that US white men still got the benefit of the doubt and
they got favorable assignments. Well I can see that might be the outcome. My data included you
know electronic and biology and chemistry and every type of science so it was not limited to a
certain field. Did you do one in law? I didn't do the work in law but there are lots and lots
of research on lawyers and they tend to show the same thing. Really? Oh absolutely. Okay.
I think one issue to think about here is
like to think yeah generally we tend to separate and say well output is really publications and
patents and for scientists and engineers. But if you really think about output it is not just
those two things but it's also networking and that's like part of your production of not just
science but in many other positions. There we see some clear differences in the type of networks
that say that white males might have and that women might have but part of that in a way I think it's
is the way they go about building their network. I mean it's not like it's not determined that
the social networks are the way they are. You can work on networking and that's where you see
ment and to network more than the women do. And women don't have time to network.
They might not. Yes. Working full time and taking care of families. Exactly. And those differences
let's say are but that's where I think that if there's a change of incentives at the top
the incentive to network might also change. And then you might if some cultural changes like the
man who takes care of the kids at home you have more time you can start networking and then
some of this difference is my my go away. Yeah let me mention that just these issues about how
you evaluate competence and whether one can do it on objective criteria or not really was underlined
for me this year because as vice dean for faculty and research I'm in charge of personnel issues.
So I have to oversee all the tenure and promotion decisions. And we had this year two cases in
the same department one white male one woman who happened to be European born who were both
coming up for promotion. And our appointments and promotions committee raved about him and said
you know this is such a clear case for someone who deserves promotion. And on her case there was
they're saying they're not quite enough she's not really ready etc. They both had
almost identical citations they had almost the same number of
published papers in good journals if anything I think hers were were more over her career.
She was on a major editorial board he was on an editorial board of a journal no one had ever
heard of and yet this committee represented his editorial board membership as being on a journal
which was not the one he was actually on. They simply substituted the name of a top journal instead
of the one that actually he was on. And you know this kind of stuff happens all the time and if
you don't have people who are paying attention to how these criteria get weighted and evaluated
then you will reproduce these kinds of inequalities. I made first of all I sent the report back to
the appointments and promotions committee and said you don't have the right name in the journal
here and then I because as vice dean I got to write the dean's report of course I you know tried
to write an equitable case now as it turns out he has been promoted we're still waiting to hear
about her so. Can we get back to networking because I think there is a difference in networking as
a woman and networking as a man. There's a no matter what if you're in a room full of people in the
industry or whatever and as a woman you approach a man who's in power. There is a observation by
people there's a sexual component to it there's all these other pressures and and things that go
into it versus the guys hanging out in the back and being the guys and I think a lot of times
I've heard a situations where men feel very uncomfortable just you know either having that
dinner or networking or having that follow-up conversation or whatever and I think that in some
sense that does hold women back in a way you disagree but I well it could also work the other
way let's face it it can go either way but the whole point is is that networking I think is
different for men and women and how you go about that and how it's perceived in everything else and
I also think that in science maybe networking isn't everything and perception isn't everything
but at least in the industries I've been in I would say that's 50 percent everybody's you know
at different levels obviously it's going to be behind you know between you know two different
people of kind of the same level but the perception and if this is someone that you can hang out with
and go have a drink with after work and all these other dynamics play a huge part not not in what
you're delivering it's extremely important again the research shows exactly what you're saying that
networking is not the same for men and women and not the same for whites and non-whites essentially
women and non-whites have to borrow social capital from white men yes in order to do as well but
and it's also there are also some research to show that it is more difficult to have the kind of
mentoring relationship between a female subordinate and a male superior because of this romance it
looks like a date as opposed to a professional relationship yes and then all your colleagues
are looking at it is that she's getting ahead not because she has merit and credence but because
favors of favoritism and so it's very difficult to walk that balance which is partly why it's so
important to have representation of women in the top level decision-making jobs as well because it
helps mitigate that issue to some extent one of the key things that I found in the research that I
did for my book which included detailed job histories for whites in several different parts of the
country between ages of 25 and 55 I found that 70 percent of the jobs that people got over their
lifetimes was because they got help from somebody because they got information other people didn't
have they had influence used on their behalf or they had someone who actually could offer them a
job or an opportunity so 70 percent of the time people had that kind of help and the jobs where
you didn't have the help was as one of my interviewees said when one job is as bad as another you
don't have to draw on social capital to get a job because you know anybody can get it but when I
asked the people that I interviewed so what do you think most contributed to your having the kind
of life you have now they all said because I worked hard because I was smart because I got an
education because I did whatever so they although they actively drew from this kind of social
connections they all individualized their success and thought they did it on their own I think that's
another thing that's important is that women want to do it on their own I mean I know I was in an
industry where my family well after the fact got very connected quit that job went to law school
went were no one of my family is and I think that that's very important in terms of knowing
and I'm not saying that I didn't have other things in my favor I mean I was well educated I came
from a nice family you know I had other things going for me but I think that for women to get
forward they need to believe in themselves and know why they got there there are plenty of women
that I have heard from that are like well the only reason I got it is because my uncles you know
whatever that never really kind of move forward or know their own worth or anything else because
they just kind of relied on those wings I mean I think that's important for women to work on
themselves I mean I do think there is a lot of work for women to do on themselves as well and
there are conversations that we need to be having with each other and supporting each other and
this goes back to my theory that nobody else really is but I think that there is a great resource
in the in the in the workplace of women sharing with women and empowering other women and looking
at you know the intelligence and the beauty and the and the potential and being happy for other
women I think that is counterintuitive to most women most women are in a competitive they feel
like it's them against someone else I know you disagree I am so stunned just
because you're standing yes okay okay now I understand okay let me let me support your comment for a
minute well she can support and research let me just say I'm not a research person I I prosecute
cases I deal with people who kill people like I'm a homicide I have no research but I have everyday
experience not as much as many people not as much but I also make the observations in the comments
that I think a lot of people feel that nobody does make and nobody bothers to research this is a very
uncomfortable area women don't want to hear they want to believe that women you know we're the
victims we need to be empowered and okay no no but I'm saying I hear this a lot that we're somehow
being repressed or this whether it be sex all of that is true but there is a great potential for
women to get together and really embrace each other I'm sorry I actually asked a bunch of people
at work this for a couple years I'm like what is the deal what is the deal in this office why can't
we say instead of the catie remark can you believe this can you believe that can you believe the
man she's networking with can you believe all of that is just contributing to the fact that we're
not uplifting each other and I think it's a real problem that needs to be equally I so let me say
first of all that I don't think in general that your observation is correct that in general I think
the more representation of women and decision-making positions the better off other women in the
organization will be and that well there may be the occasional catie remark I don't think that that's
general representation of what happens when women enter the labor force but the place where there is
some support for what you are observing can be found for example in work that Rosa Beth Moss-Cantar
who's currently at Harvard did years ago where she was looking at the structure of women's jobs
compared to the structure of men's jobs and she observed several different kinds of things first
of all that women were more likely to be in jobs that had access to fewer resources than the jobs
that men had and when you have access to fewer resources then you might hoard them and be less
likely to share right and then the second thing she observed was that men's jobs were likely to be
in the types of jobs that had ladders to better jobs whereas women's jobs were more likely to be
in ladders that didn't go anywhere and so men had more opportunity and had links to those opportunities
whereas women's jobs did not and then she also looked at the observation of the when women were
in a minority that certain kinds of things happened in terms of how people address them like it
tickly if there's only a very small proportion of women in the that work setting and she observed
that particularly when there was a small group of women and it seemed that only a few women could
get ahead then under those circumstances each woman might think that they're competing with
the other one because only one will get the job it wasn't a general experience it's mostly men
but occasionally a woman gets through and I'm going to be the one to do it so under those kinds of
circumstances you may observe the kind of behavior that you're talking about but I don't think it's a
general experience when you're talking about broader representation in the labor of the ballot
because that's the working environment that you would see I've always experienced and that many
women experience and I don't want to not have a voice or not have a way to express that because
I'm in a particular area and I'm not the general I guarantee I'll never be in the general you know
like it's just it's something that I think but even but even in law firms that there's some research
by Robin Ealy from Harvard who looked at law firms and found that when there were more women
partners then there's more chance that a woman will be hired in that firm compared to when there
are no women partners even with women in lower level positions then I would agree there'll be
different dynamics but don't you think it is a combination of things that result in a woman
and not maybe not general but certainly specifically in women getting ahead that you do need people
at some stage you may not realize it overtly as someone helping you and then the woman herself
has to have a diversion or a passion for a particular application so it's a combination of
someone who wants to do something and also someone who may want to help and most times women
well in my own case it's been men who've helped me get along so that it doesn't necessarily need
to be the one thing or the other well again most women will be helped by men because men are the
decision makers disproportionately but with women in positions of decision making they are probably
more likely to recognize and call to attention the issues of women's competence as well and
women are likely to do well but that's the problem of really telling about that that effect is it's
very hard right and because law firms let's say they have more women at the top are also law firms
where the men are different from the law firms where there's only men at the top so it could be
an effect for from both right well again the well not not just history I think that you could be a
little more specific again there's lots of different ways that one could address it but the one that
I think makes the most sense is again from what's called status construction theory or status
expectations theory that finds that when resources are distributed unequally and overlaid with
categorical differences among people like men versus women whites versus blacks and so on and so
when you observe men always in positions that have more authority more income more training more
education etc or whites in those kinds of positions then you come to assume that the people with the
resources are the ones who are both competent and worthy and this sort of research let me just say
because it sounds like it's just you know describing something that isn't real the research has not
been done on men versus women or blacks versus whites it's done on artificially constructed groups
artificially constructed categories like people might be called over estimators and under estimators
or people that like Paul Clay versus people that like Picasso so the this social psychological
research creates these distinctions and then give the people with these different distinctions
different amounts of resources and then they evaluate how they evaluate each other and again
they find that people with the most resources are the ones that are assumed to be more competent
to be more worthy to get the benefit of the doubt and so on and so forth so even without real groups
you just artificially create the groups you have this cognitive outcome because we have a tendency
to want to think whatever is is right and therefore if those people are in charge it's because they
should be in charge and again we do that to ourselves and there's the and that effect is
multiplied by then let's say a young woman or a thinking of a career if they never see a woman
in say in engineering they might assume that or they implicitly they might think that men are better
that even though it's not true and and then again they don't get the proper training and then
later on yeah they won't be qualified for those jobs and there is variation across countries
these better models that if you have a good model let's say you have a mother who is working
and successful that that will lead you also to as a woman to work and become successful
the research does show that
the research shows that women need to see other women in areas and that two things women need
to see women in other areas so they have a whole lot of women in elementary school are being
discouraged from owning into mass and sciences okay so Israel which is the most techy country
world described conference on and they had a representation from IsraelComp Dre
and they were saying that in Israel they didn't have enough women for wills and
that women needs now what you do we don't see
now you don'tails it's
way to join
Women do mentor.
Oh, no, no, I agree.
I have a mother who's still working even though she should
retire a long time ago.
She'll work to the day she dies.
I have incredible women influences.
At work, I gravitate towards women mentors and everything
like that.
But most of the professional organizations,
I belong to right now, are the only ways some of us
have counted that as a group of women.
We have gone together.
Yes.
We have been very helpful with each other.
Yes.
We've started a separate women's group.
Wonderful.
We're not sacred.
OK.
We've been to a professional group that's
partnered with the other group.
And we get good, a woman will talk about her new idea.
We will be there.
But most of us are in the same profession.
I'm in the same profession with all these women.
I'm not competing.
Right.
I have enough.
So you really have to be, you're not going to get the
support from the guys at the male
dining professional organization.
I'm not going to change that culture.
I can create another culture.
Right.
And I guess in my job, that's what I'm trying to do.
And I've had these discussions over the years.
I'm in a very different kind of place.
But I've been in that different place
in three different careers.
So at least in my experience, there
are certain types of jobs where it's
hard to get the women to get on the same page.
I had an office many years ago in Staten Island.
Ooh.
And I had to go to social functions.
And I was told that I quote, in Staten Island, women
don't talk to men.
Men come up to talk to women.
So what I had to do was to work hard on many people.
I was very friendly.
We would talk to everybody.
It was strictly business.
It was strictly business.
It was not an end.
If I hadn't had lunch with a guy, I'd
read them.
Lunch.
Lunch.
And then I made it never to leave the women, the wives,
so that the boys would get to know the ANC.
Oh, I don't understand.
Is the solution that women have to get together
and create groups to counter men?
Is that what the solution is?
It's not the solution.
There are many solutions.
Again, solutions include collective behavior,
collective actions, social movements, public policy,
organizational policies, and individual behavior.
There is some controversy, if you will,
in terms of women in leadership roles.
Should women simply have leadership development
courses, or should they have courses that are specifically
for women in leadership?
And the research tends to show that both of those things help.
So that you need different kinds of social support,
for example.
You need some people who will be instrumentally helpful,
who are going to help you with job opportunities,
and with knowledge about certain kinds of things
happening in the profession.
And then you also need social support.
You need someone to validate your experience,
who is going to help you understand that it's not you,
that it's structurally related to factors
like how women get treated versus how men get treated.
I mean, one of the famous examples of that
was the study of the scientist at MIT,
is that one of the women, and I think she was in biology,
I'm trying to remember, just got fed up one day
with feeling somehow she wasn't getting the resources
that she wanted.
And so she went around, she measured, physically
measured everybody's office.
And then she, to see how many square feet each of the scientists
had in her area.
And she found the women had less square feet of office space
than the men.
And she got together with other women scientists at MIT,
and they began to talk among themselves about, well,
what's happening to you, and what's happening to you?
And they were finding out they were having very common
experiences, which they didn't know,
because there was only one of them in each department,
you know, a very small representation.
And then their efforts to put together some data
to show that, in fact, they weren't being treated the same way
the men were, was facilitated by the fact
that Lottie Bailin happened to be president of the Faculty
Senate at that time, who was someone
who had done research on these kinds of issues.
And therefore, she kind of fostered the attention
to their concerns.
And then it went to the president of the university
who then said, well, you know, you're right.
We haven't been treating women the same.
And they started making some changes.
So that suggests individuals doing things, groups,
offering social support, having the right people
in decision-making power, who can influence decisions.
And at the right time, it happened to be at MIT
when they had the resources, I guess, to make some changes.
And then it spread across the country.
Somebody made Lottie, I think, made sure it got into the New York
Times.
And then it was picked up by all kinds of other media
publications.
And then other universities started saying, well,
maybe we should look at what's happening to our women
scientists and so on.
So it didn't change everything, but it had an impact.
Ultimately, to really reach parity,
let's say, in the men have to be on board.
Otherwise, it's just not going to happen.
And coming down to issues about perception of the jobs
and family issues, if men don't pick up
the taking care of the kids, it would be impossible for women
to be in this really competitive profession.
Well, men aren't taking care of the kids.
Other women are taking care of the kids, for the most part.
But that's what I mean.
That's what I mean.
They need to fully participate.
Eventually, you need to get the men on board.
Also, because what you don't want, I think,
it's a mistake, is to try to fix it by making women look
like men.
And to me, that's a little self-defeating,
because then it's just going to destroy the diversity
and the good things of having both men and women
in top positions is that they are different.
They think different.
Otherwise, we will have parity, maybe at some point.
But they'll be all acting like men.
And that's not necessarily a good thing.
Like to go back to some of your points.
Men tend to be overconfident.
That's not good.
I mean, it might promote them in their careers,
but they're making their own decisions.
Yes.
I'm kidding.
It's pretend.
But I'll open it up for questions.
OK.
You have a comment on the question of science.
There was a panel discussion here a couple weeks ago
on that on women in science.
And they mentioned studies where papers were submitted
to journals or for grants.
And they had women's names or men's names on the paper.
And there was clear discrimination
in terms of just what names were on the paper.
Also, my question has to do with how much
does the fact that, as was mentioned,
that the responsibility for having
and raising children isn't shared equally responsible
for the problems.
And I wonder, I read that if you look at single women
without children, that their salaries are the same as men.
There isn't discrimination.
Is that true or not?
No.
No.
What's the difference?
How much is it?
The 20% they always?
I don't remember the exact data,
but at every point of comparison, you
will still find that when you control for full-time work,
weeks worked, type of job, type of occupation, and so on,
that men are going to make more.
And that's true whether you're talking about single women
or women with children.
It tends to be the case that for each additional child,
women pay a penalty in terms of salary and such
in the workforce.
But even single women tend to be disadvantaged compared
to men.
Even male nurses make more money than female nurses
and so on.
So even in overwhelmingly female dominated positions,
men still benefit.
But not.
It's in the New York Times.
Yes.
And there was some effort to say that between the ages of 25
and something rather than there was parity.
But that's a very narrow thing.
And the gap widens over time.
But not to say that it's not a very important component.
It's not a very important component.
The gap is true that there's still a gap once you're
going to account for these things.
But these things account for a lot of the gap.
Well, job segregation accounts for the most.
And then years of experience.
And then the evaluation of women's work versus men's work
and so on.
I was going to mention, as Lady mentioned,
Abrams.
And the big case now at the New York Times
is really serious to look at.
Because we're talking about salaries of $500, something,
$500, an over.
Salzberger actually hired this person himself.
This is the person he fired.
And she'd been with this paper for many, many years,
and many important managerial positions.
He was upset because she realized and did
her research about how much the former person in her CEO
position got.
And when she was the managerial position lower one,
how much money she was losing.
And also, she had, in her job description,
and her responsibilities, the right
to put a new person on as a co-manager or take somebody off.
The judgment is not about the work.
The judgment is about brusque or indiscriminate
or insensitive or something like that.
They don't use that with men when they're making the decisions.
So when she came to the boss's office with an attorney,
he was in shock.
How did she dare come to him with an attorney?
Why did she talk to him?
Because she did her homework.
And when they responded, I don't know if you read this whole case,
when they responded, the answer was,
you're not making $75,000 less.
The original salary, what we offered you, was $505.
And then when you said this one was getting $5.95,
we gave you $5.35.
And you agreed.
Because we gave you perks.
And they showed how all these perks were
equal to the men's salary.
That was a straight salary.
Maybe he got the perks too.
I don't know.
But the point is it was the hutzpah of her coming
to his office with a lawyer, having the research,
having the evidence, having the facts,
and saying, this is not equal.
And she was fired.
Now that was the big report.
You can look at it on your internet
and see a lot of different responses to this.
But this is a case to watch.
Because it's a matter of turf.
You mentioned floor space.
That's not just segregated to women.
Architects have been told, top down hierarchy.
The CEO will get this.
This one will get back.
This one will have a window.
This chair will be higher than this one.
So when he sits in the guy is lower,
it's very psychological.
We're in a psychological institute.
There are a lot of games that were written.
There's a book from Harvard.
You might remember the games mother, the games mother.
And the told is to play.
The games mother never talked about it.
We don't have the bag of tools.
We should have them by now.
I mean, for Dan and her book a long time ago,
these books are all old books.
The problem is the culture.
Who said we don't have them?
No, I'm just saying the problem is the culture.
The women who were younger don't understand the struggle that
was done for them.
They take it for granted.
And we don't have the same force.
So the women that you want to sit around and say,
I don't need that.
I don't need that.
That's very good for men.
It's not good for the women.
Women need to stay together.
They have to help each other on every single level.
To reinforce that particular case,
there's been some studies of women on Wall Street.
And again, it's exactly the same thing.
Women may be making a million dollars,
but they're not making three.
And so in every point where there's a comparison,
men end up making more, there was recently
a study that was released about a year
so it go by catalyst, which is the research organization
that studies women in the workforce, particularly
in management and boards of directors,
in which they looked at, I think,
was 4,000 MBAs from all kinds of universities
from different parts of the world.
And they looked at controlling for issues of childcare
and full-time work and type of job and so on
that women start out in their very first job making less.
And then it just grows over the career.
And we're talking about people with MBAs.
You know, same.
I just lost it.
Actually, the gap is bigger at the top, right?
Yeah, it grows over time, particularly after 10 years.
That brings up a point.
What impact does the equal pay law,
which was passed in the 1963 or 1965?
Because that seems to be ignored throughout the whole country.
So what does it mean?
Anything?
That kind of legislation like the Civil Rights Act.
I mean, like the Civil Rights Act.
It depends on someone bringing a lawsuit.
It depends on showing that people are in similarly
situated positions and that they have similar kinds
of qualifications, et cetera.
It's very hard to use that kind of law
to lead to equitable outcomes.
And for the most part, the data that I talked about
for the Civil Rights Act, we assume
because the legislation is there,
the outcomes will follow.
That simply is not the case.
Well, does that mean that the law needs to be more specific?
I mean, how else?
That's exactly what groups are now lobbying for.
An equal pay act.
But there is already that one in place.
Well, what about how are they going to change it?
What they're lobbying for currently has to do with the right
to have the knowledge of the.
It's the exposure of public.
Like in government, obviously everything of us
is public record.
I like that because I know the guy sitting next to me
is my aunt, you know, that's good.
But you don't have that in most professions.
And I think part of the problem, and I hate feeling
like a woman, I'm a bargaining chip.
It's almost like you get the promotion.
Women get so excited.
They forget to ask, well, wait a second.
I feel so honored.
I'm so, oh my gosh, me?
OK, great.
This is so great.
And then they forget to do the research.
And then they don't have the hoods,
but in everything else.
I really do believe all of these salaries.
It's just like a house that gets sold.
You know how much it's sold for the last time?
So what's the job for going out?
I deserve that.
And it's a question that should be asked.
And we shouldn't be afraid to ask it.
We shouldn't be so taken aback by the fact
that we've been selected.
Women don't negotiate.
They don't ask.
Well, negotiation's getting left.
If they do ask, they get left.
And they're afraid that they're not.
And I think because we've been taught this way,
we're afraid that all of a sudden people are not
going to look like we're appreciative.
But hopefully you would go back to your professional organization
and then start talking to some of the older women.
Yes.
Mentoring for that.
Yes.
And it will be helpful so that each one goes back.
So I do with people in my field.
And I talked to them about presentation, doing seminar,
and asking for money.
And hopefully your whole profession,
you would go to some people and they would mention you
as all right, this is what you have to do.
No, the problem is that you are talking
that we can't do coding.
So if you want to say something, you're not
going to talk to me.
Yes, right.
Oh, I forgot to say something.
There are certain areas that have protected women
that can't have gender or sexism or ages and that much
as anything else.
And those are places where you have unions.
Like in the theater, you have a part.
You have six women come up for the part.
One gets the part.
It has nothing to do with it's her talent, her reading,
or whatever.
And the guy gets the guys part.
But there's less women parts.
After an equity and all these other unions
and health benefits, it has nothing to do with anything else.
They had a breakthrough.
The racism part of it, full Latinos and blacks and so on.
But they did work through it.
They had little clutches and people work together.
Then you have also an academia.
You have all this business and publisher,
parish, and all that stuff.
But it works for the men, same as the women.
But it's a little harder for the women.
Because even if they're senior, the men
get into the men's bathroom and they have always discussion.
By the time you're getting into the meeting,
the meeting took place in the bathroom.
You're just hearing the results.
So very hip women who are VPs in different areas,
in corporate areas, have figured out.
We're talking about women.
We're talking about men.
We're talking about men.
We're talking about decisions.
The decisions were already made.
That's what the people are talking about.
Morning, there were showers in the men's bathroom.
There were no showers in the women's bathrooms.
They're coming in the middle.
So the meeting takes place there.
And they get there and they make their decision.
It's always random.
But there are some women who already are too smart.
I know this.
Because they read some of those books from way back.
Now, one last question.
OK, one example of one woman who took it on, straight on,
she had a big budget, had a lot of airline tickets that she used.
And she called up and wanted a VP.
She wanted her her own.
Superior.
She wanted the same ticket that they had to the men
with VPs.
Because she was flying all over Europe and the United States
and so on.
And she had great these people with her
and set up the lectures.
So they said, oh, we can't choose to point them out.
I'm not a vice president in charge of dishwashing.
I run the advertising department.
What do you mean?
Why not?
You wouldn't give it to you.
She said, you have three minutes to do it
before I call up Gloria Steinem, Harriet Van Horn,
and all these famous people of those days,
Dorothy Colgowan.
And I'm not using your airline.
And I'm sending these back.
Guess what?
She got it.
She said, I don't need cigars.
I don't need first class.
I want you to hold a plane for me if I'm
like the way you do with the guys.
I love the after-pump.
I am such a case in point.
You can do all the statistics on me.
My brother told the family that when he was 16 years old,
he went to there was an ad for you
can fly anywhere for $25.
And if the plane is full, we'll give you your own plane.
I don't remember this.
He said he went to LaGuardia Airport.
He was 16.
He waited for four hours till the plane was full.
And then he was the next one.
And he said, I want my own plane.
I want you to know my brother's a very, very successful man.
It starts when you're little.
It has to do with your self-image.
And mommy darling, mommy said to me, I'll never forget this.
Your brother needs the bigger room.
He has more stuff.
I'd like to know what that stuff is.
I want some of that stuff.
Fortunately, I realized at a very young age,
I've got stuff too.
It may not be in a penis.
It's maybe up here.
My stuff is up here.
And I'm going to use it.
And I made damn sure I married a man who respected my head.
And I told Freddie, Freddie is my boss.
I work for Freddie.
He's an artist.
I said, Freddie, everything in my life is a negotiation.
I negotiate for a cup of coffee.
I want that coffee.
I want it the way I want it.
Harry said to me, and I write.
That's what I do, unpublished.
If you weren't such a good goddamn writer,
I would have made you stay as a teacher.
And I left teaching 30 years ago to write for the drawer.
If you know what that means in Russia,
people who are writing controversial stuff
don't get published.
They write for the drawer.
I'm your writer for the drawer.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Please.
Please.
Please.
I'm going to have some of this.
I have a bad answer.
Can we have an answer?
Yeah.
That's OK.
Yeah.
Oh, hi.
My name is Miriam Stern.
I'm also an attorney, so I'm not a researcher,
but I have a lot of anecdotal feelings
about some of the things said.
You have to hold the mic close to me.
OK.
Miriam Stern, attorney.
So I'm not a researcher.
I have anecdotal feelings about some of the things said.
And Professor Diddemasso, I thank you so much
for all the research that you mentioned today.
And I so agree with everything, feeling it.
I just want to comment about what was said about theater,
because I'm an entertainment lawyer, also an adjunct professor
at several universities here in the city,
teaching business law and law to filmmakers.
There is tremendous prejudice in the theater industry.
There are hardly any female writers that are being produced.
There are hardly any female directors that are being hired.
You can count them on one hand.
Same in the film industry.
And in terms of academia, I totally
agree with everything you've said.
And again, anecdotally, as a lawyer,
I've read that 2% of females ever make partner.
So there are no females up there to support other females.
Any other questions?
Yeah, I'm Fran Dillon.
I wanted to go back to implicit bias.
I had an experience this morning with a visiting transplant
surgeon.
She was, I guess, one of 40 who were here in New York
at the New York Academy of Medicine.
And I guess at the opening meeting,
she was sitting at a table with other surgeons.
And they were introducing the people at the table.
And they came to her and said, she's the coordinator.
And she was shocked, of course.
But she's one of the few, I think, transplant surgeons
in the country.
So I was interested in different sectors,
what's happening in different sectors, particularly medicine.
But I said to her, what did you say?
And she said, well, I said, I'm a surgeon.
And after that, she said, I didn't say anything else.
So I just wonder about the language
to deal with that implicit bias.
Because I think women don't have the language to deal with it.
And she really needed that.
She's in her 40s.
And she will go to meetings over and over again like this.
And so I'd love your comment.
Right.
Well, I think, again, any time one is an only in a profession
or in a group, you're going to have these experiences over
and over again.
Because people will form prototypes in their head
about who should be in this kind of profession.
And it'll be like those that are in the majority.
But let me mention two things that I think we haven't addressed
yet, and that might be useful for the conversation.
One is that while all of the kinds of things
that we've been discussing are true in terms
of the research that has looked at the issues,
women get paid less.
Women are less likely to be in positions of authority.
Women are less likely to be taken seriously, and so on.
But some women do make it.
And that's one of the things that we do need to keep in mind.
Alice Eglie and I think Linda Carley did a book called
The Labyrinth of Leadership, where they argued
that we have the wrong imagery to talk about the glass ceiling
and somehow think that everything's just fine
until women get to the top and then they get stopped.
Because they argue that these kinds of things take place
at every point along the way.
But it isn't simply a straight shot
that when women run into obstacles, they can go around them.
They can find another pathway.
And that's why they called it The Labyrinth of Leadership,
that there are ways to manage to overcome the obstacles,
despite discrimination, despite the favoritism that men enjoy.
And part of that is persistence.
Part of it is good luck.
Part of it is skill.
But knowing that there are examples of people who have
somehow done it against the odds, I think,
is something to be sure that we remember and to be encouraged
by.
One of the things I think along those lines
to keep in mind that I teach in my classes
when I teach them is that one shouldn't get caught up
in that double bind about trying to act competent versus act
nice or trying to do it like a man versus doing it
like a woman, that essentially you can't
win in that kind of a trade-off.
Hillary Clinton can't do it because someone will always
think that if she acts too feminine, she's being
inauthentic, and if she doesn't act feminine enough,
she's not someone to be admired, and so on.
So Robin Ealy, again at Harvard and her collaborator,
whose name I'm Deborah Rode, talk about opting out
of that effort to balance between doing it like a man
versus doing it like a woman, and instead focus
on the goal of performance and learning your job
and looking for opportunity and doing it in a way that
engages and involves other people and helps them develop
their capacities and their ability to win.
And when you keep the focus on what you're
trying to accomplish and how you're
going to get there and go around the obstacles,
as opposed to be stopped by them,
you have a much greater opportunity
to not be undone by these kinds of experiences.
This has been a really interesting conversation,
and I'm just curious how you would
see women and the world of work against what I consider
the greater context, which is the American culture.
I'm very interested in, say, the demise
of the women's movement that I grew up with,
and the role models that I had in the 70s,
like the glorious dynames, and that whole,
there were magazines, there were movements,
they were very, very public voices who were inspirational,
and they were role models for us.
That seems to have been plotted or fizzled out.
The role models we see now, the Oprah Winfrey's,
are more concerned about celebrity or very soft subjects,
like, I don't know, spirituality is not soft, but.
Oh.
So there seems to be, to me, a lack of cohesive movement
and leadership.
I see not to diss Michelle Obama,
but she's talking about not women's work,
but eating habits.
The other thing, the concomitant trend that I've seen,
we've all seen over the last, say, 20 years,
is this hyper-sexualization of American women,
American society, so that men and women
seem farther apart in TV, in movies, in music.
I mean, the sexual images, to me,
are shocking and stunning, somebody
who grew up in the 70s.
And I'm wondering whether the push for equality
on the job front is made more difficult
by these cultural and social trends.
I mean, we're kind of fighting against a wave that's
pushing us back.
So any comments you would have on that, I would be interested.
OK, I'll comment.
Well, it is the case that many of the social movements
that some of us grew up with have dissipated.
I mean, there's a certain sense in which people have gotten
older.
They had to go in other directions.
There became some downsides of being involved
in some of those kinds of things.
But I think that, to some extent,
the energy from those social movements
got professionalized.
I mean, there were professional organizations
that got created as opposed to just social movements.
So I don't think that the pressure for change
has necessarily disappeared, but it's taken a different form.
However, at the same time that those kinds of things
have happened, there has been an organized effort
to turn the country back from liberalism that
has been driven by a very well financed right wing movement.
I talk about this in my book as well.
And they have had a strategy for doing that that included
creating public intellectuals and generating books
and capturing the media and the development of Fox News
and all kinds of organizations to sort of create
model legislation and many, many kinds of sectors
of the society have been influenced by this effort
to turn the country back from those social movements.
So obviously, one of the solutions
would be to sort of recreate some aspect
of those social movements, but it's
a very difficult thing to do, particularly
because the Supreme Court and the campaign finance laws
and so on.
So unfortunately, as the successes of those social movements
have begun to erode, the new generation of people,
and I guess to some extent some of us as well,
sort of have to fight those battles again.
And that's sort of an unsettling sort of thing to me.
I was very happy for those social movements
and glad that I didn't have to be as involved as some people
needed to be.
But I do feel committed to supporting
what other kind of efforts sort of emerged
to sort of take things back again.
You were like, today is the anniversary,
the 50th anniversary of Brown-listed
Board of Education.
And it's now the 50th anniversary of the voting rights act.
And we're going back.
If there are no other questions, we will finish.
I just hope yes.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
