 I know there was a bit of a confusion yesterday about the time to start, but we can't really wait till 10 o'clock because we also have to take our position in the video. So why don't we start now? This morning's panel, which is the final panel before we open it for a broader discussion, is called Nationalism, Nationalism, and the participants are Emil Malek, who is Director of Passage, and Adapes, and we have Joe Jayash, who is not here yet, who is out. We have Lingamuel, writer, professor, School of Visual Arts New York. We have Paola Mielli, psychoanalyst, president of Abracou, Psychoanatic Association, and we have Pierre Desser-Nachlenz, who is here from Switzerland, who is professor of International Relations at UNIL. So we'll start right away. Thank you. Yes, good morning. Sunday morning in New York is like in Paris. People stay still for breakfast, but we have to work together. Two years ago, we founded the Fides Committee with three objectives. We work about three subjects, education, identity, and nationalism. The idea of the committee is if we could learn from the past to have an orientation for the future. It's not easy today because education is a very bad situation. We spoke about this yesterday, identity we could do many things with identity. It's love, it's death. We spoke about this yesterday. And nationalism. I don't think that nationalism is a close idea. And for these sessions that I have the pleasure to introduce, we have to think nationalism has a concept in evolution and to confront nationalism with globalization today and with religious extremism today. Because nationalism is not as I told you something close. I will say some words about three or four things. What is the weather of civilization today? We don't have world-worlds like the last century, but we have conflicts coming. And we don't know if these conflicts are social, economical, political, religious. They are mixed, completely mixed. Some years ago I wrote a book about this, the name is Al-Qaeda Against Capitalism. I think that Al-Qaeda is also a reaction against capitalism. It's not only a religious extremism, as we have to think about the weather of civilization. Everything to Freud, we have to think about the place of the religion in our society, but the place also of the spirituality. What means spirituality today? Because the difference between Marx and Freud with religion, and I will speak about this, is that Freud is discussing with the religious, but Marx puts the religious outside the discussion. We have also to think what is the therapy, what is the therapy, is modern therapy against nationalities, as if cosmopolitanism is the therapy against nationalities yesterday and today. What is the weather of civilization today? I think we are living in strange times, very strange times. The past two centuries have been marked by the consequences of two revolutions, French revolutions and American revolution. And today we don't know exactly what means democracy, progress. We don't know if international trade is good for people or not. And our life today is somewhere without ideology. We don't have no communism, no fascist really, and we could not say that extremism, mostly mixed amism, is fascism, it's something, but we don't know exactly. But what we see in the world, in the peoples, you could also see the same things inside individuals. Because people they consider that today they could do everything, no limitless in pleasures, no limitless in needs and desires, and sometimes confusion between needs and desires. And today with the internet, with Facebook, Google, other sources of communication, it's impossible to know what is individual, what is private and what is public. And this is a big problem, it's a big problem. Because there is a false sentiment, the false sentiment is that the progress of technology could be a progress of humanism, it's not true. If you take the religious people, the Muslim people, the Jewish people, the Christian people who are very orthodox, they are scotch-ups, they like very much internet, Facebook and all these things. As it's a big problem, that the progress of technology today is not a human progress. It's a facility for work, sometimes it's a facility for long, because it's messy, lingered. But we are not sure today that the progress of science, the progress of technology, is a progress of humanity. What is happening today is not new. The man like niche man, it's not true. I found in the poem of Bodleir, everybody knows Bodleir here. He spoke about the idea of God with his omnipotence and omniscience. This is the portrait of the homo economicus modern today. He thinks that he has all the power like a God-man today. And if you take what is happening in Middle East, the ideal of some killers come from this. They consider themselves with the omnipotence and the omniscience of God. That is the portrait of our civilization today. The the modern traders, they are typical of style, life. They don't know where they live. They don't know what is the moment for life, what is the moment for work, what is the moment for love. They are all the time moving and we have the same thing in the civilization today. We have connections between religion and populism. We have connections between nationalism and patriotism. It's not so easy to separate patriotism to nationalism. For example, flags on windows, is it patriotism or is it nationalism? Today what happens in France, we put flags on the windows. Two months ago, three months ago, it was a nationalist expression. Today, it's a humanist expression. As we have to think, the nationalists in confrontation with the civilization and with the modern standards. Hello. We are in a civilization where he is going with advances and regress. I am not going here to substitute myself as a pope or any government in establishing an intangible political prognostic about nationalism. More realistically, I think we have to refer to the Freud works and what Freud said about the radiance of culture and education in our life. The eta, the topics of the Freud Committee. We are coming from this and we are going in this way. For himself, Freud was against nationalism. He wrote, national exaltation is a feeling that I am obliged to qualify as disastrous as an unfair. This is a philosophy. But personally, he was an European and he stayed an European. He knows that European was not only the country of alignments. He was living in Vienna and he knows that in Vienna it was anti-Semitism, populism, nationalism and all these things. As he knows that this subject is a part of the life. He knows this. But he tried to understand this, not in staying in the moment, but he tried to understand what is happening in other civilization. Greek, Egyptian, Roman in the Bible. And what he finds? He finds what we say yesterday. I have a situation of Freud here. He wrote about this, death is made of love. Together they rule the world. I think that with this sentence we could understand what is today happening inside our world. As my question for this session is to understand what we could do against nationalism. This is a cosmopolitanism, a terra p, against nationalism. We could think so. But the German civilization at the beginning of the Second World, La Republic, the Weimar, was a very alignment civilization. And what happens 10, 20 years after it was the Nazi civilization. As we are not sure that there is a model of civilization against nationalism, we could only think about two subjects to introduce love and to introduce cosmopolitanism in our civilization. And we could not be sure that the science progress is enough to struggle the nationalism. We have to love with this. We have to consider and to discuss all the times with religions, with spirituality. And we have to don't consider that the world of civilization is happening today. I think there is a battle of inside every civilization. If we take the Muslim world, they are inside the Muslim world a battle. They don't know exactly how to confront to globalization. In the Christian we have the same problem. In the Jewish we have the same problem. Israel is also in the same problem. But we have to know that what happens today is not different than what happens at the beginning of less century. Less century, the intellectuals like Freud, Einstein, and Schneitzler, everybody. They have the same problem. They have to be proud of their culture, proud of the civilization. And however they tried to be out of the national age. It was a big problem. And remember what happened during this time. In one side he's Freud with an Avant, exactly against the nationalism. In the other side was Heidegger and Duke. They were in the Nationalism. And they are all intellectuals. All are big intellectuals and however. What is yesterday, I remember yesterday with Ed Hobins. This is a point interesting. At this time Freud said, I am not Austrian, I am not German, I am also Jewish. As he took Jewish identity as a sense of humanity and not as a religious sense. It was the same view with Stephen Swide, it was the same view with Anarand. They consider that they have to be outside the nation at this time. Because the nation was completely foolish. Although I think that we don't consider that patriotism could be the solution. There is no solution, we have to struggle every day, every minute and to stay in a way universality. This is our project and it is the project of the Freud Committee. Thank you. And now we begin this panel. You are writer, professor, school of visual arts in New York. Yes, I am a historian and I will follow your theme of studying the past to understand the present. You are all familiar with, as you mentioned, that Freud collected antiquities from Egypt and classical civilization. And I am going to just describe a few and I brought a cast of one to show you. Freud began collecting in the 1890s and he assembled a collection of several thousand objects. Throughout his writing from the 1890s until his death, he makes the analogy between psycho analysis, digging in the past and the memories and reconstructing the history of the patient and archeologist, digging up buried fragments and reconstructing the history of a city. I will read you one quote from him from the 1890s. Thus it came about in this first full length analysis of hysteria that I arrived at a procedure of clearing away psychological material layer by layer. And we like to compare it to the technique of excavating a buried city. That is from studies in hysteria. If you have been to the Freud Museum in London or if you have seen photograph, you know, the Freud organized his collection or about 30 objects like an audience on his desk and he wrote by hand. And he just reminded, he thought of himself as writing for the ages, not for the contemporary anti-Semitic medical community in Vienna, but for the Chinese scholar, for Osiris Lagada, the under world. In the center, he didn't collect Asian antiquities. They were given to him as gifts, but he kept them and he featured them in his collection. The center of his desk is a scholar's screen. No, it's with a Jade scholar, a Chinese scholar in the center of it. In the front of that, he put his favorite piece, a statue of Athena, goddess of wisdom and war. He was a fighter. Also on his desk, he had Osiris, okay, god of the under world, and then a smaller statue of his wife Isis, suckling little Horus, her baby. And the legend of Osiris in the legend, as you recall, Osiris was killed by his brother Seth, who was jealous. And he dismembered his body, scattered the body of Osiris down the Nile River. Many women would have given up if her husband was dead and dismembered, but not Isis. She got her own boat, traveled down the Nile, found the pieces, put them back together, and assembled the first mummy. It's her legend. And then she magically conceived a child and raised little Horus, who we've seen, seen suckling on this statue, to avenge the death of his father, which he did. And for Freud, these stories retold, he looks to these stories because they're retellings and they're the essence of human emotions, love, jealousy, sibling rivalry, marital devotion, revenge. Another figure, it's a baboon of thought, okay? It sits in the corner of Freud's desk. It's a little marble baboon, very animal looking, and it has in the top of it a half moon. It's a deity of thought. And he combines the lower animal deity with a sophisticated intellectual who thought. Thought is traditionally the inventor of hieroglyphics. And as such, the baboon of thought, it reminds us that our animal passions underlie our higher intellectual pursuits, represented by thought. And the baboon of thought was all, Freud also liked it because it was the, the baboon of thought featured as the judge in the weighing of the heart ceremony after death. Okay, after the body was dismembered and the parts put in jars, the baboon of thought was the judge of whether the deceased, not whether he'd been good or bad, but whether he told the truth. The little sphinx, and this I brought you a, I don't want to get unplugged here, all right? This is a, this is a cast of Freud's, one that's in Freud's study. So it's, so it's a cast, like a museum reproduction. It's a, the original is terracotta, sphinx, Hellenistic, it's from the second century BC. Okay, and so Freud owned this in about six other sphinxes. He has a black figure of vase that's edifice on the sphinx. Okay? Anyway, and Freud collected these because he felt that the myth of edifice in the sphinx is told by the playwright Safa Glies that it captured a stage in child development, little boys. And this is a quote from Freud. This is a letter to Fleese in the 1890s. I found in my own case too, being in love with my mother and jealous of my father. And now I consider a universal event in early childhood, if though we can understand the gripping power of Safa Glies's edifice rex, and why we all appreciate this statue, the timelessness of these stories and what they tell us about the human condition and history. The, the couch in, in Vienna, and you have photographs, you have the, all the Engelman photographs downstairs in your library, I, I'm see. And if you recall, over the couch, there's a, there's a print. It's a very, the original is a very colorful print. It still exists in London of Abu Sembal, you know, the, the Rakka Temple. And it's, it's a reminder, you know, so it's a reminder of Freud's word play and love of worth that this temple that cuts deep into Mother Earth is a, that the tran, the, the name translates Father symbol, Abu for the Hebrew for Father in Sembal, the German for symbol. And Freud studied history, mythology, archaeology as a way of understanding his patience and the politics of his time, you know, as you've said so well. Yeah. And today it's important for us as educators. We're both teachers at the school of visual art and the others of you are teachers to teach the lessons of history. Throughout his long life, Freud continued to make this analogy. And I'm going to end with a quote from the end of his life on the analogy between archaeology, studying the past and psychoanalysis. The first quote I gave you was from 1890s. This is from 1937, the very end of his life. And it, he came to feel at the end of his life, he was even in a better condition than archaeologists. They were dealing just with desiccated dead material, things had been buried. And his patient was right there alive, right there before him. He could keep trying to get more information. Okay, this is Freud, 1937. The psychoanalyst's work of construction resembles to a great extent an archaeologist's excavation of some dwelling place that's been destroyed and buried. The two processes are in fact identical, except that the analyst works under better conditions and has more material at his command to assist him because what he's working with is still alive. Okay, thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. I think that your discussion with your work is very important because you say that for Freud archaeology was perhaps more important than psychology. Oh, no. No, but you use it because I remember two days or one day before he lived Vienna to Paris, somebody asked him, are you free? I know that you are living and he said, no, I am not free until my antics are living with me to London. What do you think? Why? He has a so strong linkage with his antics and he wanted that all his antics could travel with him as a matter of his work, why he was so pregnant with this. Well, but he was a realist. They're beautiful objects and he lived with them for so long and he purchased each himself. Each one he took to the curator of antiquities at the Küsse Sorsches Museum and had it authenticated. He was very fussy about the authenticity. But he was a realist and you recall he asked the person who was going to help him get the antiquities out, Marie Bonaparte, a gentile woman of wealth who could get them. He was a realist and said that he might not have them all and asked her to smuggle one out. She dropped in her purse the little figure of Athena and he said, if I'm going to die without these, I'd like her with me. She put it in her purse and gave it back to him. She was able to get the whole collection out. He was so happy to have it surrounded, but he was a realist to about the times. But today, the person who is a collectioner, you think that it's to have some eternity to put them in front of him in a desk in a house? Yeah. Why? Well, let's go to Freud again. Freud almost never wrote about his collection. He said one thing about it that I ever found was that what was it to collect? He said what the collector has a surplus of libido and he puts it into objects, a love of things. No, that it's like a love of a person, but there's an attachment to it, a surplus of libido. And you said also that the emotions, he confronts emotions of antiques that use with emotions of his passions. And from this, he's coming the reflection. Yeah. And I think the analogy is more the history of the object with the history of his patient. You know, some would say, well, there's nothing the matter with his patient. And he would say, no, it's a fragment. It's from somewhere. There's a story behind it. Somebody made her. And no, no, no to nationalism. Do you think the extreme right in many countries, they consider that the modern is against history and what is happening? Do you think that it's true? Well, the things that modern life, the globalization is something without history, without past. Do you think that the critique is founded when the extreme rights is saying that the modern people, they don't understand history, they don't have respect for these things? Yes, of course, I mean that part of our problems internationally are a lack of knowledge of history. We have people destroying history, destroying objects from this time frame in the near reefs today, as you know. And it's a lack of understanding of history. But also, whoever's, you know, the people that are doing that know the power of history. That's why they want to destroy the temples. You know, it's a way of destroying the influence of the West in Syria to destroy these temples. So as a teacher, we need to understand it. And why throughout history, people who have been conquerors have smashed the statues and torn down the buildings. And that in the end, we're all one people. And Freud knew that's why he had on his desk Egyptian, Greek, Chinese. It's all about the same humanity and to teach that lesson. Yeah. What's the reason one word about Freud's writing? Because you mentioned it first as an art. And what means good you speak from here? Yes. You mentioned Freud's writing. Uh-huh. Because killing would be right. Oh, yeah. As an art. Can you say something about that? Well, I don't know that I could. He just wrote long hand. You know, and he- It's incredible. He's got it right. I have spent a thousand hours with it at the Library of Congress. Yeah, I'm familiar. Yeah. I wouldn't say it. It's extremely difficult to, you know, once you learn to read it. I don't actually see it that way. I mean, not like Chinese calligraphy. I mean, that's done as an art form. It's done as to make the body of the mind as one. Okay. I mean, I think it's just a sign of his time that he wrote by hand. You know, I would rather than using a typewriter. I mean, I would think that that more, yeah. I hope I don't disappoint you. Well, first I want to say we're having a wonderful morning. I want to say a very stimulating idea as from the very beginning. And I want to congratulate the French Committee and Dr. Nuressetian for getting together all this assembly of people. What I want to ask you, I mean, is whether you would like to consider one more aspect of what you're discussing. I eat the concept of power. Since you mentioned Friedrich Nietzsche and the Superman. I think the missing thing in Freud is power. He couldn't deal with it because of his own reasons with issues of power and control over the movement. But I think if you want to understand nationalism and what he does is that these people are drunk with power. And this is true of them and of the Nazis. The enlightened world also has issues with power. So I think I would like for you to consider adding it to our project of teaching about the issues that we have today as we had all through civilization with power. And to lean, I'd like you to ask, you must have considered that too, we have here a program way back with Philip T. is about the first gradiva. And gradiva is also a very important piece in his collection that Barry Leif and how it influenced his thinking. In a proper history, there was one philosopher in England, R.G. Collingwood, who connected historical research and historical understanding with archaeology in a very important way. Yes, an answer to R.G. about power. When you regard modern history for less century, there is some nationalism who have succeeded. For example, like Zionism. If you confront what is writing about Zionism by Martin Buber, Gersham Sholem, Zing Munfroid, he wrote about Zionism. All of them, they consider that Zionism could be universal, could be something for elevation spirit. And they were, all of them against the nationalism, but is it possible that power could succeed without nationalism? It's a big problem. I don't think it's a possibility to do. And it's exactly the same for all ideologies, all communities. At the beginning, communism was power without nationalism, at the beginning, as an idea. But it was the same everywhere. But when we confront the idea with Passage Al Act, it's different. As we could not say that nationalism is a way of construction of something. It's what is coming when you go to Passage Al Act, you confront this thing. As we could, it's a big problem. And it's why we say that intellectuals are not in the reality somewhere, because they are in anticipation of something, but when something arrives, they are outside the processes. At the beginning, for example, the Syrianist Ben Gurion went exactly in the same position of Martin Buber. And after, he changed completely. And there is a French writer who is not especially in favor of Israel. He was director of a left Christian review of a screen. He said something very interesting. He said, don't consider the way they need to have a construction of ideas. But from this construction to the state is different. That is a big problem. Maybe we should do the round table. And then because we have time afterwards for everybody to participate and ask questions and interact with. Perhaps Lynn has an answer to what a small answer I'd love to give you. Yeah, I don't have an answer. We could follow. Hello, no, it's Paul, I'm Neil Yip, sequinarist. First of all, thank you very much for inviting me to this colloquium, which I find very productive. And I want to thank in particular the committee of Freud, the New York Secunality Society, and Dr. Narcissian for organizing this event. I'm going to try to extrapolate from my thinking for this encounter a few points. I have to say that when I was invited to reflect upon nationalism and fundamentalism, I realized that the topic is immense. That is practically the more you read about it, the more you try to reflect upon it, the more you are led to someplace else. Because it's a very extensive question. And as I mean, Malle was saying before, the very notion of nationalism is a notion in progress, is a flux. So it's difficult to tackle. But I'm going to extrapolate a few points in order to find a little bit of a structure for us to think about all these topics together. The first thing that came to my mind when I thought about this particular question of fundamentalism is actually pictures that I saw in October 2001 of demonstrators that in Bangladesh that were part of the anti-U.S. protest. And that they were carrying banners with Osama bin Laden picture on them. That in these banners on the back of Osama bin Laden's shoulders were appearing burnt. That is to say the map is from Cezamis Street, which is a very, very popular children TV transmission in United States. So it was very surprising to see that the West Public Enemy Number One was shown alongside a children character that is loved by the American media and that is a spoken voice of American values. And it seemed to me very significant because if all fundamentalism, and I think that this is a point that we have to underline, all fundamentalism share protesting and reacting against change, resisting modernization, secularization, that they regard as the threat to the very roots of their cultural identity. As this example shows, in fact, the contamination they are resisting so furiously has already happened, has already always happened because fundamentalists are in fact an integral part of the world that they condemn. And this is a number one point that I want to stress. Even the fact that fundamentalists consider themselves being the guardian of a certain orthodoxy that is bound to a certain identity, this brings us back to the question of identity but I would say in particular to the question of cultural identity. Yesterday we discussed the question of identity. We didn't spend much time on the question of cultural identity. In my view is structurally connected to the notion of a nation. It is historically connected to the very birth of the idea of nations, of modern nations, which we have to differentiate from the old notions of nations. Let's put it this way, states, etc. So the question of cultural identity, which should be threatened according to fundamentalists. And okay, but for cultural identity obviously we make reference to a certain specific cultural baggage that is given to a social group which mostly shares the same language but includes traditional experiences, values, know-how that are related to a particular social exchange and particular geographical environment. This idea of cultural identity as I was saying is connected with the modern notion of nation which as Dr. Malay was pointing out concerns, it's an idea that is grown together with the major revolutions of the 18th century and that leads to the legal adoption of natural law, which implies a state whose power is not any longer absolute but is limited. That is to say a new notion of the state which is the state founded on the rights of men where the state is considered as a function of the individual and the individual no longer considered as a function of the state. So we see that the notion of cultural identity is by its very nature in flux. Cultural identity maintain an unstable equilibrium between tradition and transformation constantly. And as we were saying every notion of identity implies I'm not going to go now on the psychoanalytical approach of the notion of identity which I find though extremely significant for the understanding of this issue. But just to say it in a few words, the process, the operation identification in psychoanalyzes indicates how identification relies structurally on an alienation. The emergence of the ego, of the eye, of the subject of an assertion necessitates a passage through what Mackand would call in an undefined subject, a reciprocal subject, that is to say in exchange with the collective, to the point that the collective becomes the very subject of the individual. And obviously this is very clear when we think about the very manner in which the newborn baby is basically impacted by the exchange with the other, an exchange with the other that is in this very, you know, timing which is occurring at transmission that is symbolic and imaginary, a real transmission that implies a certain inscription of pleasure on the body. So I would say that subject identity in this respect is also a cultural identity by its very nature. But the process of identification is a process that doesn't occur only in childhood but doesn't cease to develop throughout one's own life according to one's own social life, standing the historical context in which we live, work, study, health and so on and so forth. So in a sense identity is always cultural identities, is always in the state of becoming. And therefore includes both an ocean of the community of kin and the idea of plurality and difference by definition. So it's both, you know, a community of kin but at the same time plurality and difference. I think that is very important because every time that we make reference to the idea of cultural identity as if it were a unified concept, a one, it's in fact, you know, something that is by definition very far from the notion of a cultural identity because it apostasized the idea of sameness. It somehow brings about a cult of the one that contradicts the very nature of the constitution of the subject of language which by definition is the effect of the collective. So every time that we speak of the one and sameness as a, you know, reference of identity identification, we are basically, you know, contradicting the very nation of this part. So I want to just say a word on the question of, because, you know, every time that we see in history and also subjectively, the need, emerging the need of making reference to a pre-stablish identity identification, the weaker is the subject that is expressing it. The weaker is the subject that is expressing it. As it is in case, for instance, in adolescent when we see, you know, adolescent that are in need of separating from their own, you know, family very easily embracing, you know, group identification that allowed them to, you know, fabricate a sort of identification faced to their own subjective vulnerability. So if a vulnerable subject finds is also support in the group and Freud has shown that putting a person, a thing or an ideology at the place of the idea of the idea fosters the libidinal ties among the members and strengthen the feeling of belonging. As we said yesterday, the results of this, you know, identification to the group is very often submission, homologization, normalization as, as Dr. Eisler pointed out yesterday, many, many significant issue that is the responsibility, that is to say giving up, you know, one zone responsible, subjective responsibility. Therefore, I would say to try to address, you know, the question of, you know, when is it an uncertain historical moment, certain, you know, acting out as you were pointing out occur? I would say that the more the symbolic contest is lacking, and we go back to the question that Dr. Menman pointed out yesterday, you know, the more there is lack of recognition of social integration, of education, on effective, the more there is effective isolation, segregation, marginalization, and the more unstable obviously is the subjective image, right? And the ego responds to this instability with a defensive rigidity, Dr. Menman's call it virility yesterday, I would call it a paranoid rigidity, which very easily leads to aggressivity, violence, and self-destruction. As a Lakantotas, and I think that this is a very important point to underline, you know, hatred is triggered by the very reaction of the ego vis-a-vis its own ideination, vis-a-vis the ideination that constitutes itself, right? So it's an internal sort, you know, process. I just want to say that just another point that I think that is important because it brings back something that Claude discussed yesterday. Leaders take advantage of the individual weaknesses, obviously to reinforce the group's cohesion and to obtain the submissions of the members. But this submission, though, and I think that a psychoanalyst, we cannot, you know, not take this into account, relies on manipulating the libidinal drives. This is a point, right? Which allows to run free these drives in the service of a common ideology. For instance, whether the individual is rewarded or gratifies in this way, boasting his narcissism or allowing him to kill, to rape, to dominate, to humiliate, that is to say the group and the leaders of the group allow the, you know, members of the group to satisfy what Claude called the murder lust, right? Which I think it's a very important concept that Claude offered us. That is not the same as the toadistribe, right? Yesterday, we discussed about the la poussion de mourg, the dev-drives, and we saw how Claude spoke extensively about it, you know, how the drives are by our definitions, you know, fused. We have libidinal and dev-drives to date, and that their fusion, it's at work, not in our daily life, in our, you know, processing, as well as in our relation to the social bonding. I think that it's, but it's worth it to distinguish, you know, the concept of murder lust, which is something different from that, of that drives, because it brings about the murder lust, it's just the last, the pleasure, the jouis sense of killing, right? Which means about precisely what Claude was pointing out yesterday, that is to say, you know, the question of the jouis sense that is unleashed, and that we see unleashed in, unfortunately, every week in one some kind of mass murder going on. So I think that it's worth it for us to work on this difference. I also want to, another point I want to make is that, you know, I would like, it's definitely true that we cannot come up with a definition of a notion of nationalism, but I think that is worth it all to try to define the origins of these terms, right? Because this will allow us, in a sense, to, you know, use a vocabulary in a certain manner that maybe is clarifying. Because, you know, the notion of nation, a modern nation is born, as I was saying before, with, you know, a certain new conceptualization of the state. By nation, we mean a cultural community of territorial relationship of kinship, right? A state instead, designates a structure that exercises a certain power of sovereignty on a given territory through particular institution. So the two concepts do not overlap, nation and state, right? Because one is, you know, a cultural concept, and the other one is a legislative concept. There are two different concepts. On the other hand, instead nationalism, the concept of nationalism, you know, denotates an ideology. And actually nationalism is a pretty recent concept, if you think about, you know, the, for instance, the 1808, you know, fixed declaration on, you know, the reading on the Deutsche Nash and that's, that's your own, right? But is an ideology that presupposes, by definition, an opposition between one nation and the other, and supports a single systematic vision that does not tolerate difference. So in a sense, there is nothing that is far from the notion of nation, because nation is a community in kinship, therefore a community in difference, right? Then the notion of nationalism, right? So here we have a paradox, right? And in fact, you know, the very appeal to nationalism very often leads to destroying the cultural identity of the nation. You saw this obviously in Germany, where, you know, the very, you know, plurality of the culture, of the quality of the German, you know, identity, cultural identity was completely destroyed, you know, during night season, right? And it's the same thing in a sense of what is happening today in certain, you know, in this attack that, you know, the ISIS state, and by the way, I mean, I think that we have to pay a little bit of attention here on the vicissitudes of the name ISIS, ISIS, et cetera. That is to say the name that Ash attributes to itself, because it's a name that has been, you know, progressively modified over the last six years, seven years, and that is a name that constantly makes reference to the notion of state, right? And you know, obviously of an idea of an absolute state, which characteristic is precisely to the nationalize, the nationalize, the nations that are conquered. That is to say, to destroy the symbolic inheritance of this culture, right? But including their own culture, right? They are calling it their own culture, their own history of one's own culture. I think that is very important because there is an aspect that I think we cannot not take into account regarding what's happening in Paris, right, in this respect. Because I could not not think, I mean, the question that yesterday was raised and why is it that the issue, what happened in Paris, struck the world differently in a sense than all the, you know, mass boundaries that are occurring, you know, at the same time, the world. I think that there is one reason that has not been mentioned, that has to do precisely with the fact that this occurs in France, that is to say, in a country that had a French revolution and had instituted a state organized on the rights of men, right? I think that we cannot think of fundamentalism, you know, extrapolated from, as you were pointing out, the history, the modern history of industrialization, you know, colonization definitely, and globalization, all the points that you pointed out. But we cannot, you know, not take into account the fact that, you know, the idea of a state that is proposed by ISIS is precisely opposite to the state that is being defended with the French revolution in France. That is to say, there is a no position on the notion of state that is a state here, right? So, and, but I want, in this respect, I want to say that obviously the state of the rights of men and that effect, obviously the democracy, the Western democracy, you know, is not, is not not affecting also, you know, the Eastern one, right? So as I was saying at the beginning, you know, is a discourse that is already taking place within the very states that are fighting against it. Because I would like just to, can I say one more thing? One. Okay. Just one more thing. I would return on certain consideration that I would say a constructive consideration. But in order to do that, I would return in the discussion, I just want to say one thing regarding with one thing, women, right? Because it's relevant that all the form of formalism, fundamentalism, you know, from different cultures, they target women, right? I mean, it's very clear in Evangelic fundamentalism, in the history of Evangelic fundamentalism in United States, we should not forget that fundamentalism, the very word comes from the foundation of faith that were, you know, spelled out and written by the Baptist Church in United States in, you know, in the 1915, 16th, right? But, you know, they express a common target that is women. So I think that this leads us back to the question of hatred as Lacan taught us, as the passion that is the closest to the very, I would say, existence, let's say in English, division of the subject of language. And that is precisely in response to such a division that it expresses itself. It's not accident that Freud makes the refusal of femininity, a blag on their vibrate, the key factors of resistance of the subject against his own truth, her own truth, regardless one's own sex, is the refusal of femininity. Obviously, and I want to stop on this, this implies a certain confrontation with quantum subjective difference that is, you know, for many unbearable, right? So I would say that the cult of the one that we see manifested today in many forms of recurrence to nationalism or to certain ideologies, you know, it's in fact, you know, a fetishization of the cult of the one. And that is the, based on the denial of one's own subjective existence, okay? Thank you, Paula. Thank you, Paula, for your brilliant communication. Very briefly, three remarks. You speak about nationalism and patriotism. There is a reference in this game. The general goal, he wrote in his memories, there is a big difference between nationalism and patriotism. And he said, nationalism is if we love the earth, the territory, the traditions. And nationalism is if you exclude the differences. It means who is not inside this is outside. However, the culture of the goal was some thinkers like Barres and Barres consider that we have to love the territories. And from these ideas are coming also the bad nationalism. It means there is a contradiction. Absolutely. You speak about cultural education and cultural identification. How could you explain that inside the family, one brother could be a good man and one is a murderer? And other consequence, Melman said yesterday that the women are not abroad, not stranger. It means there is some universality. How do you explain that today the murderer could be also a woman? This is new. And the third remark, you say that people need to be recognized to stop the alienation. Do you think that it's possible to include Muslim culture in our global culture and civilization? Should I try now? If you think briefly and after. So I want to say number one, there is a psychoanalytic concept that is the concept of the liberation of identification which by definition is both structural and singular. There is not such a thing as identity, for instance. Two brothers within the same family, they may share a certain cultural background, but they occupy a different symbolic place within the family. So therefore there is no sameness here. Each individual is by definition unique, even though belongs by definition to a symbolic order. But this by definition implies difference. So there is not same in this concept. So you can have two brothers of the same family behaving in ways, or having, developing ones on identification in radically different manner. This depends on the dialectic of their relation with their own caretakers which could change radically. The question of the woman, I'm totally agreement with the daughter man, the radical other, and what I'm saying is that Freud himself, the one brings about the notion of the refusal of femininity, is bringing about the notion of, sorry. The subjective refusal vis-a-vis its own alterity, the very alterity that he now beats it. And regarding the question of, you know, this implies that women can be equally in denial of their femininity than men. There is no problem regarding this. The lakana has explained to us, and thoroughly, how the subject position within sexation is a particular choice, and any subject can occupy either a male or a female position. So it's not a question of the gender, what is the stake here. So any kind of woman may decide to embrace the logic of the one, viral, the notion of virility, or I would say a phallic ideology, and behaving that direction. And to conclude with cultural, Muslim culture, recognize. So to speak, this is a very complicated question. I don't think that there is a big mistake in thinking that the masculine culture is a one. It's like saying the Western culture is a one, or Christianism is a one, or Judaism is a one. I don't think that this is the case at all. I think that, you know, when we speak about the masculine culture, we are speaking about a variety of approach, vis-a-vis a certain cultural identification and a certain religious identification. We know that there are certain characteristics of Muslims that differentiate the Islamic religions from the other form of monotheism. And I think that Dr. Melman spoke yesterday about the fundamental one, that is to say the direct idea of the text dictated by God. But there are others that I think that are number one, since the very beginning, we've seen the Islamic tradition, the religious Islamic tradition, there's been a conflict between two different ineritants vis-a-vis the text and the word of God. That is to say the Sunni and the Shiites. So very early on, after 50, 60 years of the existence of the Muslims, you know, religion, they had already conflicts among themselves. So there is no possibility of treat it as a one. And I personally think that the Muslim cultural tradition is already, you know, giving us lots of very positive things that we are including within our own reflection and reasoning. For instance, in the word of art. Thank you. We will take questions after, but no, it's time for the communication of Pierre de Sinac Leung, who is professor in international relations in university in Swiss. Pierre. Thank you, Emil. In order to follow the spirit of Alex and the instruction of Edward Nastasun, I will be as short as possible in order to stimulate debate among ourselves, which so far has been a little bit lacking. The nation has been defined by vanadee and the sun. Thank you. As an imagined community, the members of this community do not know each other. They are ever convinced that they share some common feelings. They are not disputing their collective identity. This feeling of solidarity, the belief systems that goes with it, are therefore an effective dimension. It is obviously an illusion as the nation is by definition a very large group composed of individuals who do not have a common social background and do not have common interests. Those and sociologists like to explain this illusion by saying that it is constructed by the states, constructed by the elites, and of course, the grain of truth in this reality. You cannot separate the nation, the construction of the modern nations without referring to the history of the states and also to the history of wars among states. But this notion of construction, I think, is a little bit too simple. Obviously the masses participate in or even interiorize the nation. It's not only something which is promoted by elites or by the government propaganda. From 1914 to 1918, every day some 2000 soldiers in France died in the battle. And you had an equivalent numbers on the German side. In Verdun, which lasted six months, a soldier was dying every second. So you cannot explain that without referring to this nationalist illusion. And it has been largely shared by a large, very large group of people. And those who did not share this feeling were outside this type of history. One has to read Swag, the devout fungesten, who shows the difficulty of being outside this terrible pressure. In other words, people accept to die for the nation morere polarically as they used to say in France. I am not making a distinction between nationalism and patriotism on this matter. The idea of the nation is modern. That's for sure. It is associated with the invention of a new collective identity. The nobility of the Auschian regime was obsessed by his blue blood. By Cartier de noblés. I don't know how you translate that. The myth, the illusion of the nation has been to give blue blood to every citizen. That is to say to every individual being part of the nation. The repertoire of fantasies inherent to the nationalist discourse is fairly consistent. It always comprise recurring emotional themes that express the pursuit of individual and communitarian narcissistic needs. Such as a strong affirmation of a collective identity, a quest for dignity, a sense of superiority over other people. People take pride in the nation to compensate for the individual and collective vulnerability. These continuously affirm a touchy defense of their territorial and symbolic frontiers. They envisage a nation as a spiritual creator that provides them with an identity, a purpose, a glorious genealogy and a feeling of self-esteem. In their nationalist myth, intellectuals and politicians develop narratives about their nation's unique historical destiny, inspired and guided by the providence while incarnating the highest values of civilization. Indeed, we will never fully understand nationalism or even at no nationalist for that matter. If we do not understand the unconscious and unconscious fantasy and desire which push individuals and groups to invest in this imagined community. Historically, cities have been a fertile ground for nationalism. It has developed, nationally has developed within large group, within crowd. And what Freud said in 1920 about crowd and group behavior is absolutely pertinent to understand nationalism. And in nationalism, you have always a feeling of fraternity and the erection of a leader who has to lead and to replace the ego ideal of every individual who is part of this community. Historically, nationalism has been closely associated with socio-economic and political insecurity. Helplessness at the individual and collective level has been a fertile ground for nationalist ideology. Nationalist ideology has flourished in time of socio-economic crisis, in time of rapid structural transformation as a way to overcome feeling of collective insecurity. This was particularly true in Europe over the later part of the 19th century. This was a period characterized by rapid indus urbanization, critical change in production pattern and socio-economic recession which affected people from all walks of life. Not only the working class and small scale artisans, but also the elites. Following World One, the crisis of political institutions, the breakdown of social cultural tradition and the collapse of European economy favored the development of fanatical ideology which drew the support from social categories that had been most affected by unemployment, marginalization and the loss of social statute. It is worth noting in this context that nation states are not the only type of imagined community. The same holds true for clients, for tribe, for religious groups. And any other form of close communitarian links such as sects which defend their own particular social cultural identity in the pursuit of their interest and desire. Ethnicity is a collective identity based on culture and history. It is one possible pattern of group allergens. It got me seen as a form of attachment closely related to feeling of kinship. And as a matter of fact, you had two different expression of nationalism in the 19th century for different historical reasons which I don't want to explain. You had a notion, a more political notion of the nation like the French tried to defend it or a more cultural one which was a more Germanic expression which is of course linked to a different environment and political historical setting. As an air of enlightenment, a fraud counted on education which he associated with the progress of reason. Unfortunately, progress in education has not guaranteed this evolution. Its advancement in liberal democracies has not ample recurrent outpouring of demagrarian populism and even mass paranoia. Communication networks and media tend even to exacerbate this trend. Election are often influenced by weird individuals who overtly stimulate shocking and aggressive behavior which pandemize a moral and political foundation of democracy. Education can also become a source of frustration especially in developing countries when states do not succeed in providing adequate chaos opportunity and this failure favors the advance of alienated and downgraded intellectuals and as a matter of fact, the leaders and militants of political and religious movements belong often to these categories of individuals. Today, social, economic and political condition breeds insecurity for large number of people. All the more so that it is associated with dramatic social cultural changes. This explains the resurgence of ethnoanationalism in Europe as well as in the southern hemisphere. The dramatic social polarization in the United States might also explain partly the orientation of the Republican Party, polarization which goes with the erosion of the middle class and the extreme social economic disparity. In other words, we will have to live with fanatical movements of different kind if we fail to build new institutions, new states and not only the states but also new intergovernmental institutions capable of ensuring a better social welfare. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you, Pierre, for this very informal contribution and briefly two remarks. You said that in nationalistic terms, national law is a formal figure but in civilization terms, the symbolic law is coming from the father. How you explain this contradiction between the formal figure and the father symbolic law. And the second thing, you say that in every nationalism, there is a leader, a leader who controlled the people. You are informed of science politic and also of sequinaries. But in Moses, he was the leader. But Freud explains that his false origin in racial terms is a gauge to avoid the nationalism. Do you? I don't follow that. You know, my father has highear legal force, and I follow this in French. It is a bit less than this. He is detectors. He leads the city ofchievousism. He lives inbees, wanderings and will never work in terms of the cultural laws. It is used in internationalism, the support of information about the nationalism is based on the parts of the tribe of universal design. Hitler was Austrian born and this was not quite a good guarantee of not being accepted in Germany. So I don't think that I have difficulty in following... It's the same people, Austrian and German. I mean not in terms of different history. Hitler came from a social background from a historical environment, which was very different from the German elites. And this has also been something very shocking for the German establishment at the time, who had difficulty in adapting immediately to this new environment. But in relation to the nation as a community associated with the woman, with the mother, with Jandarck in France, it's not only the case, because in time of war, the leader is invested as really the one who represents the nation. And all these war criminals that you have on the place of French city, of Klem also, and all these people were considered as a father of the French nation. And they were associated with the figure of the incarnation of the nation. So it's very divided. You have fantasy about the nation, which is something in which you could completely rely on. You could espouse this marginal representation of the nation. So something in a way pre-Adepian. But when the nation takes arms, it's neither leader. And the leader is generally a man. Okay, time for questions. Maybe we stop about five minutes for people to go to the bathroom. And then we have a final. Bye-bye. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. This is a very little reminder. Just came out that I spoke to you just an old lady on a particular fame. And this is a collection that a series has done. It's a gift for you, thanking you very much, but the pleasure of having met you, really. Yes, same for me and I'm very pleased that I'll be signing. Look forward to look at it. Do you want to sign in a chat? Sure. So I could keep it inside. Excellent. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. If you take your seats, we can start. No, no, no, no, no problem. I think the best way to proceed for the next hour or so is to first ask. If there's something they want to add or something they want to just question or say, following which it will be open to everybody. To come into the discussion and I know there are some people from there and others who have specific comments and contributions they'd like to make. So I think Paul wanted to say something and I think Henry wants to say something. So, which group? No, you go ahead. Back one. And then, yes, I know. Well, I just wanted to throw out a remark or two to no one in particular, but anyone might wish to pick it up on the subject of symbolic mediation in the formation of groups and of identity. We have what my tempt one to think of as an evaluative range of symbols that have been mentioned from time to time, the scarf worn by the supporter of a football team. The flag that appears over the militarized vehicle coursing through the desert. The flag in the window, which I think rightly points out, on reflection somehow changes from being the flag that hangs in front of the embassy. In other words, needs to be interpreted in a variety of ways according to context. We also have, and this is actually what brought the issue to my mind, we also have the statuette on the desk. In other words, we have perhaps the feeling when we reflect on all of these matters that the need for graven images, the need to be surrounded in some sense. By mediatory symbolic objects is as universal, despite the prohibition on graven images, as the incest taboo. In other words, it is something that somehow or another, all of us, and perhaps we need to recognize the all, the inclusiveness of this all, require as part of identity formation and cultural identity formation. So then we reflect, because we can think of this as I say, taxonomically as a sequence of values from bad to good. And we say to ourselves, well, our relationship with the mediatory symbolic object depends on the capacity to say no. In other words, the intervention of a certain doubt or ability to distance oneself from the absolute value of the mediatory object. Without losing the sense of its importance to us and perhaps even informing our identification with a group. And we say to ourselves, well, there is a kind of a saving or salvific capacity to doubt, capacity to reflect that transforms the mediatory symbolic object from a kind of knee jerk affirmation of thoughtless solidarity. Into an expression, for example, of cosmopolitanism. And we say to ourselves that it is this power of reflection that makes the difference. And I'd love to end these remarks on that note, but I do think that one of the important and exciting things that we've experienced listening to everyone in the last couple of days is that the mind, if we take into account the underpinning of the unconscious, is too unruly for this pride in the power of reflection to be all together reliable. We have said repeatedly that there probably is in all of us in some sense or another lurking murder lust. And I think that perhaps the humility of our wish to affirm the enlightenment values and the cosmopolitanism of Freud, you know, in hopes that he can somehow or another be brought to the attention of and included in UNESCO. Is in part the recognition that it's Freud who shows us just how fragile our identification with these things actually is. So I just wanted to come back from yesterday morning and make those concluding remarks on my part. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you for your welcome. I say one thing about Moses, because it's not only the problem of this change, because in the Bible, in the Bible, Moses was forbidden to go in the promised land, because he make a fort. And he cannot live in the land promised. And this position in other land gives a land for the other. It's one point. It's not only the problem of the stranger. I think it's, I don't know in English, sure the term in Asian, with the stranger. And I think I disagree with Emil about the end of ideology. Because in Europe and particularly in France, you have the question of the laicity like an ates. It's in ideology. It's a big problem, because this ideology begins after the Shoah with the neo-Libya reduced. Who said, I don't want the relation with the one. I don't want this relation with the one. Because the one of the Nazis was a nationalist, because the being is the being, is the identity. And I think the difference with patriote and foreign American can say about that, because it's a people of migrant. And they say, we have to lost to live in other land. And you have to learn to us. And you have the same thing with Don Locke. Don Locke say, liberalist is okay, but with ates is the cow. Cow is good. Cow. Cow. Cow. Cow. My thesis is about the malice. The end of the link between Eros and the rest culture. The ambivalence is a good thing, because you have a contradiction inside me. You have not this link between Eros and Thanatos. The link was Brink by, like you say Emil, by the principal of the father. And no, the question is how you can construct a new link with another relation with the one, but not without the one. Because the ideology in France is without the one. The intellectual route without the one. I don't want the one. In the big university, I don't want the one. And I propose for working together to read a little text of LACHA. I speak with you. It's a text at Luven University. And LACHA said two points. The Etique of Freud was it? Was it a serious Etique? One point. And two points, the Chico analytic can create a new Etique. For example, LACHA said the question of realistic principle and loose principle. The realistic principle is not the question of the fruitstession. I have not to fruit the fruitstession. It's not the problem of the fruitstession of my kid. Because the reality in the unconscious is the ambition. Because it's the satisfaction of need for reality, and it's a problem of narcissism, say, Freud. And I finish. And the loose principle is very shocking. It's the idea of the thinking depend of the loose principle. And you have the end of the link between effects and reason. No. Okay. Thank you. Well, I would like to suggest a... general distinction. When we come to Freud, he was predominantly concerned with individual psychology. Group psychology only came into existence in 1921. And I think in this symposium today, there was not enough clarification and demarcation between individual psychological concepts and mass psychological concepts. And I think we should be aware of that difference when we approach political and social events. So this is, to me, a general oriental. For example, there is no way to understand the idea of state through individual psychology alone. I think Paola, you gave a very important historical review of the problem. And maybe you should have mentioned the Italian Renaissance, and Niccolo Machiavelli is one of the first to create the modern idea of state, the assassination. This leads me to a second consideration. I didn't hear this morning anyone talk about terrorism, not just nationalism. It's a different phenomenon terrorism. So it's important to understand the concept of latte roe when did it come into being. And here the thing is very discreet because we see the terror of individuals who impose their will and challenge nations. One dynamite package can cause World War I. This we saw in Sarajero with the murder of the prince and the princess of Austria. And today too, a few terrorists with a few packets of bombs can terrorize a whole nation like France and a whole nation like America and state. And we have nuclear weapons to fight big wars but were impotent when confronted by a few terrorists. So I would also would like to stress the historical phenomenon of terrorism. It started in the early 19th century with the Russians murdering Sar Alexander, who was a very enlightened reformer. And it continues until today. So how can we deal with terrorists? Now the other fact is that the Nazi state was not only ideological, it was a state built on terror. On a terror of a group of gangsters who took hold of a nation and the same thing was repeated in Germany. Hitler and Himmler and Haiderish, they were all gangsters and international criminals. But the Eurovert trial established is crimes against humanity. And we see this again today. My last remark is about father and son hostility and murder. The first murder in the Bible is not between father and son. Let's refer Freud made his basic mistake because he went with Greek mythology and not with the biblical fact. In the Bible, the first murder is between brothers. Like you said, the first murder in the Bible is between brothers. So it's the fragile hatred that creates wars and dissent. And the terrorists today who choose their own father image and love and affection and bonding are actually fragile in their attack on the rest of mankind. And so let's keep these things in mind. Thank you. My name is Michael I live in. I am the Director of the National Association for the South of Nationalities. I'd like to attract your attention to a detail in the problem of identification, national identification. When we read newspapers today or we listen to a program, we see very difficult attempts to identify the perpetrators of the attacks in Paris or in the United States. Basically, to identify who they are, for example, when the riots about Belgian terrorists doing this or this or Paris or American terrorists like all that, those mass killings in the United States, the difficulties come from the fact that in different parts of the world, there is a different approach to identification. If you look at Europe, there were basically two approaches, the blood approach and the birth approach. Germany, by the blood approach, which lasted until the second World War. And even after the second World War, Germany was willing to repatriate, for example, vulgar Germans who were Germans still in the time of country in the grave. But considered as a blood German can be repatriated. Later Germany changed slightly because of this Nazi situation by replacing blood by culture. That way, people of Jewish origin could qualify. A purported blood approach is also spread up in every east of Germany, whether Poland or Russia, etc. Let's say somebody who is a tartar in Kazan. Kazan is Russian since the time of Ivan the Terrible, which still considers himself as a tartar, not a Russian. Tartar by nationality, a Russian by citizenship. France had another way. France was land born in France, men's Frenchmen. But this was since the time after the revolution. But the France kind of got out of it, out of this business, by making obstacles. Because if you're born in France today, you're not automatically Frenchmen. There is a lot of conditions that you have to, which I will not list here, to take so much time. United States took the French way of born in the United States and stick to this. Anybody born in the United States is an American. And what French moved away from it. Now, if I want to give you an example of a toro attempt to identify a person, I can give something which I experienced myself. I was in Poland after the war. Coming from the Soviet Union, I was one of the Poles in the Soviet Union. And I was at the University of Lodz, and we were given a kind of piece of paper to fill up our belonging, to whom we could belong. Get a very fork questions, attempt to identify the national origin. It was citizenship, nationality, religion in native language. I think if somebody cannot be pinned down by one of those, what I wanted to underline is the difficulty really to pin down what nationality is. And I'm not speaking of sub-national groups and super-national groups, but to complicate this even more. Thank you. I wish to save few words after the presentation of Emil Mallet, about the difference between patriotism and nationalism. Maybe I will speak a mixed French and English when I can't do that. I think I must suggest that patriotism is when we love our ancestors, and we thank them for their life. They gave us, and we are ready to continue Peppetu. We know it's not so easy, because through it discovers the edipus complex. So it shows that the father we love, we went to murder him. We are not satisfied with the life he gave us. And we know it's clinic that many people are depressed, melancholic, unhappy, and are not ready to thank the father we have too long. Nationalism occurs when the people is bound, is or are bound. I don't know what the is or are with the people are bound. I'm sorry. When people are bound by not the law for the father, but the hatred for an enemy. And in this way we are ready to die, to preserve the father. So it seems that there is always a fight, a conflict between the law, but we aren't sure of this law. And the fact to be bound by the hatred against the enemy. May I say that I think that in Israel no, they are more patriot than nationalists, because what a Jew says is that his blade had before with the life which was given to him. And to die in these circumstances is a pity. When we say we have to love our brother like ourselves, I would say that the brother has to be, that he was a mishier, I think I'm going to say this, he has to watch out because do we love ourselves? That seems to be a question. Maybe another point. The only way to be near or farther close to him is to die. This is this notion, this instinct, as maybe something to do with that point. Emil, what do you think? I have to tell you something. What is your name? He said that it's not enough to consider that Moiz as a stranger is enough to be against nationalism. I think that what we said is not in contradiction with what you said. I think that if Moiz is a stranger, it could be a guy for Hebrew people, only Hebrew people. And it's not enough. I agree with you, it's not enough. And always what is saying, Shout Malmo, I think there is a big difference between love and territory. And it was a difference with the patriotism and nationalism. If you take the Bible, you have God who is transferring the law to Moiz as, and Moiz as transferring the law to the people. There is three transferred. And the people became the people because he received the law. Before the law, he was not the people. This is the miracle of the law. But after it's not Moiz as who is going to the country, it's his brother Aaron. Why? Because there is a castration here. God's consider that Moiz as the prophet is not able to continue to the territory. If you see what is written in the Decalogue, the Ten Commandments, there is nothing about territory. It's only the relation between men with God and the relation between men together. Nothing about the territory. As it's not Moiz as who is following and entering in the country, it's his brother Aaron who is beginning. This is not contradiction with the Talmud. If you take Mayimonid, Mayimonid is saying something very important. You have to take education from your father. But if your father is not able to give you the education, you have to keep love for your father and you have to find another master. As Moiz was a master of the law, but outside the territory, I think there is difference between patriotism and nationalism. As the law, we have only two things. I agree with you. Two things. We have the law and laws. We don't find this. I think perhaps Pierre-Cières-La-Clance is not. He doesn't agree with me. But I think the two things, the law and the law, the law of the La Pilsi and the V, they are outside the nationalities, outside the nationalities, and they guide us to accept the law, to accept the territory because we could not live without a territory. I think it's a big injustice. I told you exactly what I think. That we consider that the creation of Israel is for left people, is considered as the best thing. Personally, I consider it as one of the best things in the 20th century. I told you what I think. We have to consider it as a banal ideological thing. Of course, it's not. There is a gate between law and ideology in the creation of Israel. But it's the same thing that we find in all ideological things. It's the same thing. As I consider today that we have the law, we have the La Pilsi and the V, we have these two things, and it's what we have today to express, if you want, the nationalities form our mind. It's what I think. Thank you. Maria, before Maria, maybe Pierre wants to respond to something. No? Yes? No? Maria, you are... I think we have to be careful that this distinction between patriotism and nationalism is usually very ideological. We think patriotism is a good thing. Nationalism is bad. But historically, and from a doctrinal point of view, it's not that patriotism is about the love of the ancestor. I mean, you see the love of the ancestor in every nationalist position. There is always ancestor that we have to love as the heir of a nation. And I can...Paturities means often associated with the difference of a very small community. So we forget that in both of this ideology, we have in-group, out-group. You have the feeling that those who are in-group are good, except that in this out-group, there are always some subversive elements, the Jews, the Protestant in France, and so on and so on. You have always somebody who is destroying the community, being a patriotic or a nationalist community. I have another example. In Switzerland, we have Niech in the Vales. We had two communities, two villages, Chirmignon and another places, I forgot the name, it's very close to Krom. And these two small villages have been fighting each other about a story of Faufach. How do you call Faufach? About...A band? A band. And it has totally structured their relationship for hundreds of years until 1945, and even later. You could not be from this band and marry another person from the other bands because they were from outside. I don't know, two or three kilometers separating these two villages. They were both patriots, you see. So I don't accept this distinction because I think it's totally fake and totally ideological. It was reality. Of course, it was symbolic reality. But I mean, coming back to the issue of symbols, if I have the flow, it's interesting what you say about the issue of a mandatory symbolic object. I'm not a psychoanalyst, but I know that psychoanalyst have today a lot of patients who are so-called borderline, and they have difficulty in symbolizing, in accepting the ambivalence of reality, and in accepting that what is real cannot be symbolic. So they are geared toward action. And what happened in Iraq, in Syria, when they destroyed this wonderful heritage of ancient civilization, they were destroying symbols of something which they could simply not understand, which was a source of humiliation, and they could not understand that it was a symbol, that something which was not real in the sense of their figurative understanding of the reality. And I think this has also taken into account when we speak about ideology in general and nationalism in particular. And of course, this brings us back to Tautem and Tabu, Tautem and Tabu, where the Tautem is such an important aspect of reality. If you love me only very yet, I will not be afraid. We are only ready yet. First of all, I wish to thank very much both the Alex Center, the New York Institute and Adnassawson for the organization of this weekend. Thank you very much. Three brief remarks about what happened this morning, which was very interesting, I think. One is about Freud's collection. I think that the love that Freud had for his collection is very over determined and very highly conflictual, because he started his collection at the death of his father. And I think it has a strong link with something with his relation to his father and to a conflict between his Jewish identity, where representation are forbidden, and his Greek culture, where representation is absolutely classical. I think that's very strong. It's interesting to see it on that angle. The other thing, I wanted just to say that I felt very close and very interested by Paul Lasnieli's presentation. I just wanted to thank her. We have no time to discuss today, but it's a pity. And the third thing is to Pierre de Saint-Arclers. I wanted to tell you that you stressed something very important. I think the feeling of insecurity is not to feel protected by the lows of your country. And the lack of the low protecting you in security with the exacerbation of nationalism. Thank you. I too would like to thank Paul Lasnieli for her very powerful presentation. I think that we all stand on blood. Last week we celebrated a cultural heritage in this country we call Thanksgiving. And what we remember from that is that the first winter that the fundamentalist, reverse group called the Puritans were dying because they did not put enough away food for the winter and that the Indians had saved enough and saved them. That was the first Thanksgiving. One year after that, the Puritans celebrated a holiday to remember that they had been saved the year before. And the Puritans were the only one at the holiday. All the Indians had been murdered by that second year. Absolutely. Just as the perversion and misogyny of the Inquisition was ending in Europe, it was beginning in this country. Come on you too. figes b Lor I liked what Paula said about women and empowerment or the coming to age of women, but I'm going on a different place. I think the U.S. got into the wrong foot with Bush right from the beginning, speaking about an axis of evil. And using the word somewhere along the line, I can't quote it exactly, of going on a crusade. He inadvertently, I think, but so not even sure that he didn't think crusade on with Christian soldiers and not really realizing even where it came from. But I was appalled that his speech writers didn't catch that or that they put that in. It set right from the beginning the wrong attitude, I think, a motion that's entered into a problem of a war without any careful reflection of what sort of war was being started. This was a small group of people relatively in Afghanistan led by somebody coming from, I think Saudi Arabia. I'm a very bad historian. And the people in these countries strike me as more coming really from tribal identities than with their religious aspect as part of it also, rather than they're more like a feudal system. And we were talking today about the modern state and I was reading recently about the Magna Carter. And the Magna Carter, of course, wasn't the document that we respect today. It came into being slowly. It was a few of feudal lords who were content with what King John was doing, who was a very bad king in certain ways in his administration. And they wanted to get more power from him. So that gradually the Magna Carter, because of a few words in it, became the founding of something that expanded into this idea of the state should be for the people. And I feel that while it was already a word, the term that we use now terrorism came into being with the World Trade Center event. What's new about it partly, the difference is that we have the modern phenomena of a technology that's combined with terrorism, and perhaps without our even acknowledging it, it goes, as somebody mentioned today, beyond simply the human. The humans aren't entirely in charge of the technology in a certain sense anymore. And we very rarely actually acknowledge that and think about that. So today a person can take up an idea and he can use it to bring down a huge building in New York City and kill 2,000 people. Terrorists never could do that before. So I think I've already mentioned that I think the modern state came into being very slowly and that we haven't really understood what Paolo was also talking about, which is the thing that's already happened, which is that modern states and technology and ideas have somehow already happened to the people from these tribal societies, but they don't really have a way or the educational ideological background to think about what's happened to them in a way that would allow them to even have a discourse with us. But we don't have it. We Europeans and Americans don't really reflect on how we don't have a discourse with them. Thank you. This is a treasure island and I'm so pleased that our French guests are here. I just wish we had more New Yorkers coming and people from America to visit you, but really they are watching you on the Internet. I'm promising. I'm hoping that they are watching. And there will be a reverberation. There should be a reverberations from the pebbles that you have thrown, the symbols, the words that you have thrown together. You'll have a good after effect. And I want to use one symbol that was so beautiful. It brought me here. On the Internet I watched. And the symbol of the pigeon, the humble pigeon, the pigeon that is made up of different languages, how that pigeon must never put itself higher up on the hierarchy to be the superior, the king, the czar. But remember, the pigeon can fly and my hope for you as well. Thank you, Claude Londman. Claude, I did. Jean-Jacques was COVID. To a path. Claude. Yes, we are in New York. And the town where the United States of Organization is founded just after the war. And I think it's possible for the Committee of Foreign to study the rights, the universal declaration of human rights. And when you read this text by articles, 30, 30, 30, it's very interesting for me, perhaps for you. We read possible activity, each line of this text. And it's very interesting because the first article says, we are ego, ego. No, all cities and all men are ego in the right and in dignity. And the world of dignity is very difficult for the thinking of right because it's a literary, literary, a terrible literary. And in 30 articles you see that the singularity of men. The citizen is the collective, man is the individuality. And I think it's possible we will work the right and the psychoanalytic. It's possible, I began in this work 10 years ago. But it's necessary to definition exactly for an analytic, but it is the singularity. It's the subject, it's the ego, it's the antimatic, and the end theme. What is it? And this artic you see, this exactly this problematic. And in the first artic, it's possible you speak with a specialist of right of the organization of the United Nations. The nation, just the name of the time here. It's possible you had some analytic idea, but it's very difficult. The singularity is necessary in this world. My singularity and the singularity of other. And the war, my right, to a report, my singularity. And I have a regular, yes, to recognize the singularity of other. And the nation, plural nation, nation's organization, the patriety of democracy. Just patriety is very interesting to use with this term democratic. What are you thinking about that? Thank you. If you agree, if you agree, Ed, we have no Claude von Mann, a reaction of the panel, and we conclude together because it's... Claude, I was thinking about that. First of all, I want to thank the participants of the Round Table this morning, which was really very interesting, of a high quality. There is an answer, I could say, an obvious answer to the problem of closed nationalism. This answer is a political answer. It's trivial. I think we will agree to this answer. The answer to the closed nationalism depends on the success of the failure of the European Union. I can say that here in the United States, because I think the United States is a union. It depends on what Jürgen Abermuss said, is it possible to reach what he calls a post-nation, which doesn't mean the desperation of the nation. But is there a possibility of a post-nation? When I say the success of the European Union, I don't mean the economic success. I mean the political success. And what I want to say is as individuals, we belong to different sets. In the terms of the theory of sets, which is a mathematical theory, one individual can belong to one set and to another set and then also to another set, different sets. But what links all these sets together? And this is in reference to Kantor theory, is that there is one empty set, one empty set. This empty set, we can refer it to the fact that the language in the language, there is a signifier which is always missing. This empty set can make comfortable any individual people to belong to different sets. I am proud to be French. I am glad when France, the French soccer team wins a game. But I belong also to others. For example, I belong from the beginning to the Lacanian International Association. It is one set and we try in our association to deal with the empty set. There is nobody, no one who can say it is the one who can substitute to the empty set. The empty set is what we call the former discussion, we can call it also the other with a capital O. Something that will be never closed. So there can be many different sets linked together and one can belong to one or another set and different elements can belong to one set. We can be different and belong to the same set. But I wanted to say it is strange that a political question, which is I think the answer to the close nationalism, is also a mathematical answer and also a psycho-analytical answer. Thank you. In the spirit of the American superficiality and simplicity, I would like to make a comment. When I think about this, I am reminded that central to Freud's idea and central to psycho-analytic ideas is the notion of anxiety. The paper on inhibition symptoms and anxiety, to which to me is one of his important papers, really talks about the sources and the causes of this anxiety and in which way various defenses are mobilized in order which lead them to symptoms. Now anxiety is a response to danger and danger is what motivates or leads to these feelings that we describe under other names, vulnerability, insecurity and so on, which are really manifestations of a response to danger. It's another form of anxiety, if you will. And underneath all these situations that we have discussed today is the fact that we are talking about people who either are really vulnerable or insecure or are made to feel that there is a danger there. I think the comment the lady there made about what President Bush had said about the evil whatever and the axis and evil and so on reinforces the view among certain people that there is a real danger and we need to protect ourselves. When there is danger there is aggression because if you are threatened with something you need to be prepared to defend yourself. So if the danger is outside of you the defense is aggression and I think what we are seeing is convincing people that there is a big danger and that we have to respond to it and the response inevitably has to be true aggression. No question that some leaders have in the past as they are doing today take advantage of this mechanism to create groups to then create more terror and more sense of danger and therefore more aggression. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. As to conclude the panel and I finish. Do you have a problem? I'm going to speak in a little bit. I just want to say a little punctuation first of all I appreciate it very much your presentation also because you brought in the question of how to deal with the issue of nationalism right and you were speaking about the introduction of new institutions I think that that's an important point that you underlined and I agree with you that very often in reality the notion of nationalism and patriotism overlaps and we have all sorts of examples of it yet I still think that it's worth it to try to think a difference and appreciate very much what Charles and Marna introduced right now that is to say this differentiation between a relation to the ancestors you know that is a relation bound on love rather as opposed to a relation of defense against what is other all right I think that there is something very crucial because one of the characteristics of the you know constitutional venation historically modern nation is precisely you know the invention on the part of the people to create a certain historical background for themselves be it through actual facts or through legends right but that implies the integration of the same of their fathers let's put it this way in other ways a respect for one's own ancestry right and a love for them that is to say in a danger that we know so much stressed by Freud you know related to Gote what you inherited from your fathers reconquered to make it yours right and this is a very difficult a very difficult process because we know each of us as an allysant know how difficult this process is but is a process that implies an act of love and I feel that this is something very specific about the vision so the the question of nationalism instead it seems to me that precisely what brings about is the opposition to one's own difference because in patriotism as you know in patriotism you integrate within your history also the difference part that are part of your own background instead the characteristic of nationalism is the exclusion of this no difference so I think that here we have a very major point of this and I just want to say one final remark if I made that there is one piece that I think needs to be underlined about fundamentalism that is the attack that exercised by fundamentalism against the symbolic universe of the other because what we are talking about in terms of for instance of the elimination of a certain historical artifacts or books the writing it's you know an attack that is directed against the symbolic you know universe of the other that is to say is ancestry and so so on so forth and I think we are in a tuntative the Twitter and I'll exhibit it also the local the law and in in talking about in talking about nationalism I mean we've we've raised all these interesting intellectual issues and different issues regarding the symbolism and in and with also I just I wanted to end with stressing the more general underlying practical thread that runs through terrorism and and that Ed mentioned one call one similarity we find with these events is that people are acting out of fear and terrorism and something Pierre said to that that the threat of poverty and lack of education and you know what can we do you know the possibility of social programs you know in government and you know and that's all thank you in the mail you know I'm very embarrassed to say anything new to what has been said but I have a problem with the with illusions because if we follow fraud illusion are caused by helplessness and he deals with religious illusion but what he says about religious illusion could be said about about ideological illusion be there a nationalist or other so for fraud I think I think that the development of education rationality and science might also attenuate the impact of illusion okay we can follow him on this issue but illusion in a way are also necessary because we cannot have link of solidarity among ourselves or inside a state without some form of illusion how to reconcile these two aspects of illusion and illusions which are really dangerous and illusions which are necessary for continuing to live together. Thank you I have to conclude very two brief politics messages I want to provide that a leaks sequentiality association of America and from France to have briefly two politics messages and after an address to you at first. Freud was a western thinker and universal I don't forget that I am coming from France but born as a Jew in an Arab country I think we need to have between America France and Arab countries a dialogue we need to have a dialogue with Islam and not fundamentalism. Reminds briefly said there is a difference between Nazism and communism. Nazism was a murderous ideology. Communism the interpretation of this ideology was murderous. We have this morning very interesting distinction between nationalism and patriotism we need to have a distinction between Islam and Islamism and we have to work together to dialogue with Islam for the peace notably in Middle East because we need this peace and I think we have to work together. This is the first political message. The second political message and I want that you were American with French while we want Freud inside UNESCO not only like a flower I know that America have reserved and critics vis-à-vis the UNESCO. Personally I think like you UNESCO is more tear-monedist than universal but I think if we are able to put Freud inside UNESCO UNESCO could be more cosmopolitan as it is a politics act to do it and I think together we could have this politics act to conclude I want to tell you Ed and the Edics Center we have to tell you thanks for your generous hospitality you are generous host I think that without you this seminar could not have heard here. There is a Freudian address to the intellectual community of New York but also with YouTube to all the world. I know that New York is a big city the purpose of the world resonates here we know this it's a place that is more profoundly cosmopolitan there is no other city even Paris is not in the same capacity to be cosmopolitan and to resonate of what happened in the world we are seeking that together we could return to Freud and I think if we do this we could help Europe to be against nationalism it's a prevention our work today here is a prevention that national is in growing in York. Although you know the thinkers of the Middle of Europe and Freud was one of them and Freud he prevent at this time he say you have to hurt and to be against the possesent of delirium we found then in every time today is Islamism and fundamentalism and he said this most religious people they impacted the history of humanity and often caused disasters we have also today in this time and I think the co-analyst could be also politic for preventing all this thing this is the objective of the Freud committee that was created in Paris. I know as I finish with this thing there is a Bible saying next year in Jerusalem we hope that to meet you all of them next year in Paris for a new chapter thank you very much. Thank you Emil there is an English saying that it takes more than one to tango and this would not have been possible if the you and marilla and charl have not been influential in bringing this about and I want to thank all the French participants who have come all the way from Paris to participate in this meeting and have made it meaningful by their presence and I also of course want to thank our American participants Lin Ganwell Professor Paul Fry and Henry Lothan whom I know for half a century thank you very much.