 Library room. And put this on the train and sunrise by radio. qriga? Actor-in- attempt he played the field. Who is the pastor? The father burned on the common? Yeah. Yeah. Good thing to do. I see you severed what Near Good pitch. May I put this? I'm Edward Nersasian, the Director of the Helix Center. And I want to welcome you to this joint meeting between the Commutee Froid and the Helix Center at the New York Psychoanalytic Institute and Society. This meeting, which has to do with this content in the society at the moment, was proposed to us by the Commutee Froid and Emil Malet and Maria. And we are very happy for being able to organize it under our auspices. I will ask the President of the New York Psychoanalytic to say a few words. Dr. Yum Bakin. Madame Espílsio, please Present me again. Ala Sashite, second one, Leitik, and the last two. The New York, and later the New York, the Zeta Uni. This is a three-color song, a three-color song, a committee of Freud, a helix, a two-color, a head-nascension, a tasana mi, a mil malay. I want to say, the vision that we came home with this should extendforum to students. Come home now. clerk, the next one. Go to the court and speak your name, and please please pull from your hand or face the news. I invite you to order the Deboune Mumon. Please join me if you Capacity extends an, The Khe 1968 wish that more 400 types of inclusive possibilities and echoing, Ah have to explain. It would be been because Franks studied creation, family youth inDX on the 3rd, 2013 and today we have higherage coming out because I am walking out of my Rosé to learn the strong to learn excited about what I feel our Oh reward The toiola, pains to all three came. Hypnotize the particular civilization and itstestHoge contains different supports become learn you loved In yevou jes and I will now welcome you to the presentation of the APNIC APNIC APNIC APNIC APNIC APNIC APNIC APNIC APNIC APNIC APNIC APNIC APNIC APNIC APNIC APNIC APNIC Sancerini Tonyana Male Dr. Mark Smaler, President of the American Psychoanalytic, Dr. Smaler, the President of the American Psychoanalytic Association. Thank you, Ed. I'd like to thank the Helix Center and New York Psychoanalytic for hosting, obviously, a very timely Congress. Maria asked me last spring, if I might, when we were in Stockholm, if I might join you, and I'll be able to be here for part of the day. But as I have thought about what this Congress, this committee, will be addressing, two things came to my mind. It began last Wednesday evening, Wednesday afternoon, in between patients. I kept getting alerts on my phone that there had been a shooting in San Bernardino, in California, about 40 miles east of Los Angeles. I paid attention, but then went back to my patients, and then that evening was meeting my wife for dinner. We went through the whole dinner, and I completely forgot about the shootings. And I want to just say something about that kind of forgetting. Number one, I'm kind of numb, as I think many people are in this country, in terms of the frequency of these mass shootings, whether they be political or just the individual rampage of somebody compelled to kill him or herself and others. But that numbness has set in for me over the last couple years. The other hesitation, I think, that led to my forgetting to speak about this is that when my wife was six years old, and though the memories are a bit cloudy, she was in her first grade class in the north shore of Chicago, and sitting at her desk, and there were, she heard popping noises from outside the classroom. The next thing she remembers is huddling under her teacher's desk, and the teacher telling her and her fellow students to be very quiet. And there was more commotion, more popping in the hallway outside the classroom, and then silence. And what had happened was a 30-year-old, very troubled, very disturbed woman had gone into this elementary school and began shooting children and teachers, left the school and went and shot down the street some house in the neighborhood. This was somebody who had been under psychiatric care, obviously not successful. And so every time there is a shooting, my wife relives that trauma, and in that sense it's close to me and to our family. Our job, it seems to me, whether this kind of violence is individual, of an individual who's gone mad, or a group that on the basis of an ideology imagines that they have to kill in order to get that ideology across, that is something that's psychoanalysts, that this group and whether in Europe or in the US and throughout the world, we have something to offer. I was telling someone last night at Ed's cocktail party that I spent a day and a half in Washington, D.C. in September with our lobbyists and visiting staff of congressional leaders to talk about are there ways that we can prevent these kinds of mass shootings. I live in a country that continues to be obsessed with guns and cannot let go of guns. The statistics, if you read the statistics about the numbers of people killed in our country with guns compared to anywhere else in the world, it's shameful. So we can talk with congressional leaders about that. But what they're also very interested in is they're interested in what we offer in everyday language, a psychoanalytic perspective about what compels an individual to do this. And these kinds of meetings are critical and essential and call us to leave our offices, to stand up from behind the couch and go out into our communities, our larger communities, like you all have come here today and say something about it because the public is desperate for answers. Because if not, that hopelessness, that helplessness that sets in, that I experience every time I get that CNN alert on my phone that there's been yet another shooting, that numbness sets in and we have to interfere with that. We know something about the impact of hopelessness and helplessness that creates that kind of numbness and through our educating the public and offering what we have, what we've known about the human experience, but also what we can learn from our communities, what we can learn from these acts of violence. We have something to learn as psychoanalysts as well. That's a very important piece of it. But I think if we do that, we can have an impact. And even if it just is to save some lives. On my signature, on my email, I say psychoanalysis, now more than ever, psychoanalysis, now more than ever. Thank you and thank you for inviting me. Dr. Charles Melman, who is the founder of the Laconian Psychoanalytic Association, International Laconian Psychoanalytic Association. Dear friends of New York, Morial and Paris. There is one thing that surely we have in common with food and probably with Lacon as well. And that is that we haven't done any better than they have. What do I mean by that? I mean that we have failed to have academics as well as public opinion take into account the case to the understanding of the world that are provided by psychoanalysis. Let us consider the greed and the dream problems that we have to face today. We shall perceive that fruit and probably Lacon as well showed that we had no choice but interpret and elaborate them adequately if we were to solve them in an adequate way. But do that imply? It implies some form of complicity between former enemies who thus become partners also. They have to be given the information that will take them away from their blind hatred of the other which is known as other than self-hatred. But is there such a thing as justified hatred? This point however is not the subject of our discussion today. World and Lacon did see that Thanatos could be the overwhelming force. This today the world may be seen as divided into two groups on the one hand. We have the peoples whose only law is enjoyment and for the sake of enjoyment they are ready to sacrifice their own life. And on the other hand we have the peoples whose only consideration is an exalted form of religion and for the sake of that religion they too are ready to sacrifice their own life. The only thing that the two groups seem to have in common is an addictive behavior pattern. So addiction unfortunately is not something that can be subject to dialectics which means that it is out of the reach of reason. We wish to have the works of Fred listed among the world heritage sites referenced by UNESCO. You are well aware that such a step will not change the course of a story. However it will be a small stone paving the way for the possibility of a different future. Thank you. The first round table is on education and the participants are Marilia Eisenstein, Victor Azalee, Paul Frye, Gerard Pomey and Jean-Jacques Moskowitz. Thank you Ed. So I have a great pleasure and honor to chair this first panel on education and it will be an open discussion if someone to read a paper or a short paper or part of the paper and then discuss I think the best is to feel free but I will probably give to Professor Frye will start. Well thank you and welcome all. My French is equal to reading and comprehension but unfortunately very little to speaking so you will have to endure my English which I will at least attempt to enunciate slowly. I chose this panel because of course while I have opinions about civilization and about discontent I feel a little more qualified to speak about education. In recent years in addition to various duties you can imagine as an English professor I have become the executive co-director of the Yale New Haven Teachers Institute and its national emanation which is called the national initiative and what we do is sponsor collegial content driven seminars for teachers preschool through high school. I have taught a great many of these in the summer time and during the course of teaching them I have heard perhaps to invoke the word more meaningfully for the first time the discontent of teachers. And I am very much concerned that and by this I mean primarily what we call public school teachers that is to say state and locally sponsored education as opposed to privately sponsored education. I am very much concerned about this and the paper that I have distributed takes up what I take to be the two dominant modern philosophies of education neither of which I think are in any way adequate to the needs of the student population in general and neither of which I think sufficient even for the students whom it is best calculated to serve. The first of these philosophies of education in a certain sense however consciously of course is unclear, descends from Plato and the idea behind it is that you e-dos or draw out knowledge in students through a process of warmth in atmosphere participation and encouragement of creativity. This philosophy of education dominated educational thought in the 60s and the 70s what you might call the Aquarian Age of education. Another philosophy of education has largely supplanted it owing to the inadequacies of previous one and that is a philosophy that seems to me derives most respectively speaking from Locke because it seems to suppose that the mind is a blank wax tablet on which information needs to be imprinted. And it is obviously a very different attitude toward the mind and it puts teachers in the same subject position exactly as students because teachers too are supposed to be blank wax tablets on which both pedagogical skill and the content they teach need to be imprinted and in this atmosphere we have what in English we call teaching to the test an emphasis on core knowledge to be imparted largely by rote in classroom situations and in the teachers own behavior the supposition that everything they do needs to be scripted. In the French translation it says screeped and I'm afraid I think it should be screeped and maybe acry day would be a clearer term I don't think the correct term is screeped. In any case that's what we call what teachers are obliged to do both in preparing their daily lesson plans and also in meeting the class. You begin by saying good morning class as you're told to do and then your teaching duties proceed from there all of them script well it seems to me that one great advantage of invoking Freud on an occasion like this is that if we understand these two traditions differently he can be seen to reconcile them. On the one hand while he's no more interested in innate ideas than most people are since Kant he nevertheless does have strongly inculcate us to recognize the as one of the preliminary speakers said desire to learn the innate disposition to know or to learn which is in part driven by infantile sexual researches. The infant is as desperate to know the truth about the things that matter to him or her as a philosopher is to know about the things that matter to him or her during the course of growing up latency adolescence there's the great danger of course that this desire to learn will be suppressed altogether. On the other hand we can make something of the Lockean tradition if instead of the idea of the blank wax tablet we keep in mind the notion Freud's notion of the mystic writing pad in other words the palimpsest of imprinting that acknowledges the dynamic relationship between unconscious drives and the effort all of us make to form something like a coherent consciousness and it seems to me that the basis for pedagogy and for mediating the issues of transference that have to be involved in education but that surround these two philosophies of education crudely the platonic and the Lockean it seems to me that the issue for education is understanding that the vagaries of human love which so much drive the wish to know need to be through the transference transformed stabilized as a kind of object love that we can call the love of understood ideas and by this means we need to recognize that both the aedipal resistance to the mentor or teacher and the abject identification with the mentor or teacher need to be curved mediated and a common ground between these radical extremes both of which it seems to me can be recognized in the structure of discontent that concerns us so much abject identification with the mentor of course has a great deal to do with the formation of fundamental solidarity and aedipal resistance to the teacher sometimes in the same personality has a great deal to do with the generation of hatred so it's commonplace enough to say so but it seems to me that our task is finding through our understanding of the dynamics of the transference a common ground between these undesirable extremes thank you I'm sorry if I went on too long. No you were not long told and it was I'm personally I was very moved because you you really have a very psychoanalytical understanding of what teaching is I mean the part of the casexis you have to casexis person you have to have a strong casexis on the teacher and then if things go well this casexis can go from the person of the teacher to what he teaches and that seems very important and I was also very interested in your paper to the place you give to philosophy saying that finally a child is in love with philosophy because he wants to understand how mind the mind works. Yes thank you. Who wants to react? I can't. Yes. I try I try in my English and without papers so you forgive me if I have some difficulties to find the good translation but listening to the president speaker first I am speaking that there is no relationship evident between education and teaching because on the method at least because in the method teaching does not let speak of anything and specially not speak of about sexuality, about drives, about what any kind of obscenity that is repressed by the common education and it on the contrary of psychoanalysis was first I don't know to say the rule rule is to let speak to let speak the free association which are not free which are all going going back to the drives to the obscenity of drives which is not permitted by by good education. In principle there is no way to join education and psychoanalysis on the method but in fact anybody can see that there is in the life there is a strong relationship. I mean that education as well as psychoanalysis are the same boundary with the prohibition of incest and this prohibition is a common day is what? case is correct it is depends yes demanding the austerity pressure there is a stronger relationship between what is so necessary in the Jimmy Oxygenbecause in the we are wondering what should be told different interesting theories what should be organized with individual They are to find out about these things that are arguments and speak to who are personal at the unique protection ofitizen types.Click around for many reasons so just you when you think among the peace they are talking And what is the wave psychoanalysis is leading to? That means to two main things that has something to do with this contents. That is resolution of the symptoms by speaking. Because only speaking as a subject and the symptom as no subject and speaking is making some help. First thing against this content. And second thing is the dissolution of the edifice complex as the end of the analysis on the front end way to understand it. And so on this way it's very clear that analysis has something very strong to see with education. But the methods are not the same. So we have a good orientation by speaking first of the question of education. A way to educate that has nothing to see with science. Science has not been able to civilly-see the mind of the people. Always this content is going on, on his basis of sexual discontent. And science itself is changing and is now like a new religion trying to give explanation of what are the sources of this contents. But outside of the sexual reasons and outside of the prohibition of incest, which is the law on which the edifice complex tech is universality and which are the way in which we are trying to civilize the desire, always savage, because taking within this discontent. But maybe I will not say no more from now and after in the discussion. If I understood well, Girac Pameo, you are saying that psychoanalysis and education have the same aim, but it totally controversial or different method. One is contracting and the other is deconstructing. Yes. OK. That's it. There's a wonderful paradox in your paper that I admire very much. And the idea is that education or pedagogy advocates free speech yet speaks under inhibition. And psychoanalysis fully acknowledges that language is a prison house within which we struggle. And is much more skeptical about free speech while at the same time articulating issues that pedagogy tends to wince away from. It's a wonderful paradox. I wonder how it's affected by the loss of verbal inhibition, let's say, in post-war times. It's true that the schools, and here again, I speak only from American experience, are remarkably alert sensors very frequently on the subject of sexuality. But at the same time, there is among students, and of course among teachers, too, the common currency of freedom to speak about these things in less formal situations. So I would think that there would be a slight erosion of this paradox, perhaps not for the good or for any productive end, owing to the collapse of verbal inhibitions in the last few generations. I don't know what you would think about that. The sexual education I am speaking of is not the sexual education of free speech on how to make love or things like that. It's something like more prophon that includes the discontent of what is coming from the edipus complex. And of that, there is no speech, nowhere possible, because it's a very personal thing. I mean, the men, like the women, are afraid of their own desire, which is coming from the discontent itself. And it's only analysis we can make that more civilized. We can come to terms with it rationally, perhaps, but not emotionally. Yes. Yes. Yes. It makes sense, because you have discourses, which are very, very welcome-stranded, and very intelligent and full of culture. But what Andre Green would call dead discourses, because when the discourse is no more rooted in the drives, it becomes totally different, concrete. For example, what is coming from our bazis culture is some kind of hate of the feminine. Of the feminine, I say. I mean, of the castration. And this can be educated by rational ways. But only with personal ways, like analysis. That's why we have something very unique to give, to civilization, and with these contents. Yes. Yes. Thank you. I speak in France. Excuse me. So I just'll accommodate what we have in France, an excellent theorem on a set breaking, certainly no but Editorial ofoviare. I also make a video on the defense programme touched by the provost's difficulty in coalition-learning method. Bless you. Surprise me. This is good talkingotti, what channel. The bl beginner, the destruction, immNP. He met the destruction, he wanted me to deliver our perception is very important to the R One is to use the three quartet To make the difference between 111 on all those ones allED all we know of everything is not counter required but first I guess what I'm looking for is this activity? Huh... That's Cocoa... Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Yes, maybe. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Good morning, friends. As co-founder with Shalmel Man of Committee, I want to say something about what I heard this morning. The committee was founded to explain why today could be not an explication, but could be very accurate to understand what is coming in extremism, in nationalities, in dead drive. I think it's very important not to take Freud as a commentator, as a journalist like I am of the actuality, but to understand what is happening today, and I try to speak in French and Madia will translate. Our positive That's correct. Yes, it's an architectural visit. and the academic AOC, economic, medical, and medicine, and the discipline of the plus-allapsic analysis. Freud had two reservations about psychoanalysis in America. Thank you. One was that Americans were superficial. Thank you. And the other was that the medicalization of psychoanalysis. The medicalization of psychoanalysis. But he did not talk about the As an peg up, according to the gay and outside The medicalization of US.</?? The real approach to his way of doing the history, his constitutional identity. These events in Paris, in San Bernardino, and in Arabia show that Freud was right first. Those who make a sacrifice in the name of God, in the love of God, do so in reclaiming the love of God. In the past, the American people of New York, in the past, in the past, in the past, in the past, in the past, in the past, in the past, in the past, in the past, so now in the United States, in Arabia, we all have a chance to get together to realize this point, that in fact, the death drive and the life drive, eros and Thanatos can be... Can go side by side. One point in common between Freud and the Americans is that Freud and Americans read the Bible. What does the Bible say about the Bible? The Bible says that the death drive and the life drive go side by side, hand in hand, but we have to choose the life drive. The Bible says that the life drive goes side by side, hand in hand, but we have to choose the life drive. And we can see from Freud's work and his life how he put the arrows before Thanatos. The truth is that in his story with his speech he quotes the Bo Hugh Freud on behave and fetch offorces, out of cavellos, about health, that makes me call the economy, about how to extend conversion. Who is critical to living, along the risk Teacher Bog slice, And by saying that the economists who won the Nobel Prize, Edmund Felds said that in taking a risk, economic risk, for progress and for life, Freud taught us more than that. Thank you. Yes, please. I'm not current with Freud. I haven't read Freud probably in 30 or 40 years. And I don't condone violence. Schopenhauer, to describe the concept of resentément, a deep abiding resentment, anger. I understand what motivated those people in California and those people in Paris. We are told that anti- that any criticism of Israel is anti-Semitic, that anti-Zionism is anti-Semitic. And we're not allowed to discuss these issues at all of it has led to our committing unbelievable atrocities in the Middle East. I understand the rage that people can feel when they feel that their own people are being assaulted and they have no way to even cry about that. I don't condone violence. I don't condone the slaughter of innocent people. But I do not feel that I am innocent. I don't think anybody sitting in this room is innocent. French foreign policy is as much an atrocity as American foreign policy. French history with colonialism is as much an atrocity as what the United States has done over my entire lifetime. And I think that more than Thanos and Eros being part of the human personality, I think we have to speak about our own personal responsibility for where we have led this world. And I think you're being far too gentle on ourselves here. We bear responsibility for what we're facing today, every one of us. Thank you. Well, first I think you can hear in the responses both of Monsieur Moskowitz and Monsieur Bormé the acknowledgment of a violence within and especially of a violence from the standpoint of superiority, which is, let's say, the structure of a self-condonation, although it doesn't emphasize it, but I think that we have to think about our task today to think about Freud in relation to these matters. And in that regard, I'd like to go back to the death drive beyond the pleasure principle of Freud toys controversially with biological metaphors, as we know, and speculates that the death drive is the wish of the organism to return to a simpler state, in other words, in a certain sense, to uncomplicate itself to the point of a zero degree. That's, it seems to me, an extremely challenging and, can I say, seductive speculation, because I think one of the things we need to acknowledge feeling in ourselves is precisely that wish for a return to a simpler organismic state. The question to me is the relation between the death drive and quéons and quéons and belief, to believe that one, to wish to be with God in saying, for example, Allah is great, is, it seems to me, a more or less open and direct expression of the death wish. But on the other hand, not to backtrack and rehabilitate quéons, because what I said before is really my stance on these things, but on the other hand, it's clear that there's a sense in which one might believe in something that affirms life. And that if, you know, given the premise of the necessity of belief, which, in a certain sense, for example, marks acknowledged, one might at least think of education as a matter of cultivating those beliefs in something that affirms life, rather than, rather than in something that makes us wish immediately to be with God in a sense. And that is why I believe that the belief in life is a way to believe life so as to be with something higher. I don't really agree with you and with your comments. I just wanted to add that I really think that the definition that was given by Freud in the outline of what his death drive is extremely important because it shows that death drive is important in every, even in the thinking process. It is to separate. And to think we have to put things together when little children, you teach them that an apple and a pear, they are fruits. But he also has to learn that an apple is different than a pear and they have to be separated. So death drive is in the thinking process of everyday's life. But what you mentioned, it can also go to this belief of total tranquility and that and beyond. And that, yes, of course. I have to, you wanted to speak and then jump, and then jump. Yes. I would agree that forensic strategy level and it gave a great mental makers do challenge to make them kind of comfortable. context t because it has actually due in the function meeting so there it you been national y the one round of legal business got right well meet of the especially the is underlining that Freud spoke already in 1916 of the enigma of this districtivity and hate and that is an answer to the edlea fibless, la completude, vulnerability, it's an answer to human vulnerability. So there are two choices or education and the work of civilization and he didn't say that but I think I was thinking of Kultur-Aghabite and or Babarism. Yes, I think with the question of Paul Free, maybe we are reaching to a point that Freud has lived as a question, a point where Freud has only give something for us to look for because he says it I think in a special way, why to prefer to be dead, to answer to the death drive, to prefer to be near the father which is in the sky, I mean the father of the religion, why to prefer death because it's like that the mass murderers, they know they will die as well. And I think that Freud has not answered to the question what is a father? He has not answered because there is no possibility of answer in the sense that father is always a son and there is a choice between the dead father or the son who wants to be a father and he can't answer to this question. I mean on this point to be like the father is to be like the dead father. I mean when a son wants to be a father, he identifies himself to the dead father. He wants to kill his father, his own father and so there is a circle and there we are maybe a question to answer to something that Freud has not solved, I think. Manja? A couple things to respond to the panel and I teach community college for many years and I also teach students who have difficulties with English, immigrant students, I run a program for them and I'm also a psychoanalyst in private practice so I have a little bit of both of these fields. I wanted to say one thing about the idea of Dr. Fry said about love of understood ideas and to touch on the point of Jean-Jacques's point of the seductions of violence and to maybe hypothesize that it's making understood ideas less understood or putting castration as an opening to combat the seductions of violence on the part of teachers and the part of opening discussion that makes something possible. We should, nobody said today, I mean the important point that education is one of the impossible professions for Freud, right? So we're dealing with a point of impossibility and to kind of make that point of impossibility exciting and the point that we all share that we can't finally, finally have an answer to the death drive would be on the side of the finally, right? So that was one point, one point, one first point, so the idea that understood ideas lack, that understood ideas are never finally understood or could always be understood another way, right? So that's the opening towards education. That was one and then the other is that I think that some, I think that still on France and this thanks to our own, it's, it's, it's fantastic and revolutionary to come to school. They can talk about sex, they can talk, they feel they can talk about anything. So these, these, they're not as separate as they used to be long time ago. Thank you. Just a quick response. I wanted to apologize for the phrase. I didn't mean by understood ideas, received ideas. I meant ideas thought through autonomously with the understanding of course that they always need to be thought through again. Okay. At the risk of responding as the superficial American psychoanas, just a couple of thoughts, I'm so glad to be here and I would like to be able to stay longer but I can in these issues but especially regarding education. Like you, I, for 14 years, ran a program in an alternative public high school in Chicago working with mostly kids, adolescents and gangs, having most of whom it experienced unspeakable trauma by the time they're 10, 12 years old and their, their involvement in the gangs begins to make absolute sense that having had the experiences that they've had, had any of us had similar experiences, we too would have wanted to be a part of something beyond ourselves as a way to repair the damage of that original trauma. On the surface, and again, remember, I said I'm, I was trained in Chicago. I used to sneak into lectures of Heinz Kohat who had obviously a great influence on my psychoanalytic career. One of the fascinating things when you observe what looks on the surface like the most self destructive behavior and a wish to die that, you know, by the time the kids are sent to the alternative high school, that's what they're up against, it is amazing and remarkable and something that's humbling as a psychoanalysts to see that when we provided treatment right in the school, psychoanalytic treatment, individual and group treatment right in the school, so they would have math class and then they might come to a group. They would have English class and then see an individual therapist who was either an analyst or psychoanalytically oriented. The transformation in a relatively short period of time of that aggressive, violent behavior is remarkable. The experience of being listened to, being heard, having an opportunity to have someone witness one's internal state and the transformation of that's what seems like inevitable violent behavior like a gang experience provides begins to fall away. The death instinct, if you will, begins some kind of a transformation into a wish to live, into a wish to learn. Now we've all experienced this in our offices, but to see it dramatically in terms of adolescents who are so violent by the time they come to school, high school and to see the little bit of a compassionate and pathic experience become transformative, like I said, is very humbling to the psychoanalysts and I think the question is, is there something we can learn from that at the risk of sounding superficial? Thank you. Thank you, Mark. Thank you. It's not a special thing. Yes. You know, I just want to add something, what you said. That is to say, we cannot divorce education from the social, cultural environment and of course the creation of institution at the time or the problem of institution at the time of fraud was completely different than what we have to cope with. That is to say, sexuality is no more an issue in repression. The market has invaded our way of life and the market is extremely permissive in relation to our driver instincts. It's very permissive and of course in the social, cultural environment, the identity formation is much more complex and has become in a way a sociological issue. One should not forget that the terrorists in Paris were all coming from prison, delinquency, criminality and so on. It means that they have totally failed the process of the identification. In other words, we cannot discuss education in the old way, in the way it is perhaps still authorized to the elite which has a way to promote the elitist education with certain tutors, professors and so on going to Harvard and Yale later on if the parents can afford it. We are living in a very, very divided society where a lot of people, especially in outside the cities in France, are totally devoid of the normal educational process. Yes, thank you. I would like to add something which is linked to all what was said. Now, in the construction of the ego of a little child, let's say about four years old, when there is a difficulty, the child may have a phobia. He may become phobic which is a system of a defense system. When the, if this phobic defense cannot be constructed because there is a failure, there are more serious difficulties. Shall I take an example? All the child can become phobic and have a phobia of cats like little hunts with horses. But if he cannot construct this phobia because the environment is not good enough, instead of that, he will not have a psychic defense, but he will start saying, I do not like cats. And from, I do not like cats, he can go to, I hate cats. And then to, old cats are hateable. And finally, we should kill old cats. Have you had a move on then? Yes. I should forward concern after me today as always numerous factors of social, cultural or political unrest which underlie contemporary discontent produce in individuals at the loss frequent, identically disturbances, more destabilizing that the mere feeling of this quiet, individual identity problems are complicated by a new unishiness. They are no due to an issue in stability produced by external disturbance, social, economic, cultural and political, subtly tangled together, exercising their competitive, destructive effect on a disoriented subject who feels lost, this disturbance and divine with the internal crossroads of fidelity in certain cities, creating fragility in the destabilized sense of self. Thank you. I think we will end this panel. I want to thank the speakers and to thank everybody. So there is a large break and then everybody back here will start at noon meeting which will start precisely at two o'clock. Thank you.