 Hi, good afternoon everybody. Welcome to the Helix Center. My name is Jerry Herwitz. I'm one of the organizers here at the Helix. And I want to make a full-to brief introduction to our moderator today. And Marie Louvine is herself an artist, painter and poet. And she will moderate this panel discussion and introduce you to our distinguished panelists. Okay, thank you. My mic is off. Oh, can you just... Yeah. My issues. I think we also... Whoops. Good too much. I think we're also supposed to remind you that there's a conference on December 1st. The... Right? I don't have the information... The SciArt conference. The SciArt conference, which you can see on the website. It's fully explained. So today we're going to attempt to tell you about American poetry today. It's only a beginning. So to introduce the program, the American poet Ezra Pound proclaimed that poetry is news that stays news. On a different note, his contemporary William Carlos Williams said that it is difficult to get the news from poems, yet men die miserably every day for lack of what is found there. Do modernist maxim such as these also define the ever-expanding range and diversity of poetry today. Which poets or groups are doing interesting or important work? Who are the earlier poets that inspired them? And what is the nature, role, appeal, and significance of contemporary poetry? When it comes to grasping experiences and communicating their meaning, what does this art form provide? What kind of subjects to poetry journals and other publications focus on? How has the production and promotion and reception of poetry changed in the internet age? It's very much about the internet age and the 21st century. In response to questions such as these, around table of diverse and accomplished poets, we'll discuss what's going on in the poetry world today. They will explore the allure and value of contemporary poetry through different lenses ranging from the formal to the linguistic to the conceptual to the psychological. And in the second part of the program, we'll have our usual Q&A. I'm going to introduce the participants in alphabetical order and ask you each to raise your hands as I say your name so people will know who you are. Patricia Carlin received her PhD from Princeton focusing on Shakespeare studies and poetry and poetics. Her most recent poetry collection, Second Nature, appeared in May 2017. These books include Quantum Jitters and Original Green, Poetry Collections, and Shakespeare's Mortal Man, a study of Shakespeare's plays in their cultural context. She's published widely in journals and anthologies such as Playad, verse, Boulevard, Bomb, American Letters and Commentary. And is this right, McSweeney's internet tendency, right? And she co-edits the Poetry Journal Barrow Street. Honors include fellowships at the McDowell Colony and Virginia Center for the Creative Arts. She teaches literature and poetry writing at the New School where she has received the University Distinguished Teaching Award. Can everybody hear me? Is this? No. Slow. OK. Amy Holman. Amy Holman is a Pushcart Prize nominated poet and a literary consultant. Her collection, Rin's Fly Through This Opened Window, was described by one reviewer as part freak show, part searing insight. She's also the author of four poetry chapbooks, including the prize-winning Wait for Me, I'm Gone from Dream Horse Press. Her poems have appeared in numerous magazines and anthologies, two numerous to name, including Archaeology Magazine, American Letters and Commentary, Barrow Street, Fail Better, I'll Stop. But I'll end with the first anthology of TV poems and the best American poetry in 1999. She teaches poetry workshops at the Hudson Valley Writers Center. Paolo Javier. This collaboration with Listening Center, David Mason, appeared as a limited edition book cassette. Oh, his name I cannot pronounce. You have to help me. Earlier. OK. Published by Text and Town in early 2017, a featured artist in MoMA PS1's 2015 Greater New York Show. He is the author of four full-length collections of poetry, including Court of the Dragon, which Publishers Weekly calls a linguistic time machine. A new chapbook, Maybe the Sweet Honey Poor is forthcoming from Nion Editions. And last but not least, Stephen Massamilla is a poet, scholar, professor and painter. He holds an MFA in writing and PhD in English and comparative literature with a focus on poetry from Columbia University. His new multi-genre volume, Cooking with the Muse, won the Eric Hopper Book Award, the National Indie Excellence Award and others. His previous books include the award-winning poetry collections, The Plague, Doctor in His Holeshape, TAT, Forty Floors from Yesterday, and later on Aia, as well as translations of book length works by Neruda and a critical study of myth in modern poetry. Massamilla has published recently in hundreds of journals and anthologies. Again, the list is too long. Agni-American literary review, Barrow Street, Colorado review, Denver, quarterly poet, lower poet daily. He teaches literature and writing at Columbia University and the new school. Okay, that's it. I guess I have to get my microphone back. And yeah. If it works, can you hear me? I'm not going to talk much. Yes, is this all right? Okay. So I'm going to ask Steven to say a few words to begin the program. Very good. I would like to thank Anne Marie for that gracious introduction and thank all the panelists for being here today and thank everyone in the audience for joining us to share an afternoon talking about poetry. I've been tasked with the impossible mission of conveying to you the various strands of modern contemporary poetry and to do so in just a few minutes when it would normally take me about 400 hours. So I better get started. I thought I'd start by just pointing to something unusual. This is counterintuitive, but this project that Anne Marie mentioned, cooking with the muse, is a cookbook that's also a poetry book that contains hundreds of recipes and hundreds of poems and some recipes that could be poems and that's the most avant-garde aspect of it. But I just thought I would point out some poems in the book to show you that they look different. These are all contemporary and some of them modern poems, but here's one called spice reflection. It's a sonnet, a love poem set in a restaurant. I wrote this one myself. Oh, by the way, this one's paired with a recipe for duck cohen feet, spice with coriander and star anise, which is wonderful to make this time of year if you're not committed to having turkey for Thanksgiving. There are turkey recipes here too. The poem it's like to write about swans. The only problem with swan for Thanksgiving is that everybody fights over the neck. Here's a recipe. Here's another poem by Claude McKay, Harlem Renaissance Poet. You see it's also a sonnet. So without explaining what a sonnet is, you can see they look very much alike. Here's another one by the contemporary poet, Vietnamese American poet, Manglan. It's called love poem to spinach. As you see, all the lines are scattered across the page and it looks very different. And others might look more like, I mean, there are more sonnets by people from all different. A supermarketing California by Alan Ginsburg and the first line of the poem is what thoughts I have of you tonight, Walt Whitman, and it's written in long with manian lines. So if these are all, and I write lines like that too, I don't just write sonnets. So the point I wanted to make is there's not one form that writers are writing in today. Some people may think that there's a 19th century way of writing that's all formalist and then there's a modern way of writing that's all open. But the terrain is much more complicated than that. So I thought I'd just mention briefly that there is even a group of new formalist poets, Dana Joya, Marilyn Hacker. You could think of many Alfred Corn, right. I mean, a lot of us can think of an example to a right almost exclusively in form. They write sonnets, they write villainels, and longer forms. This is not so different from what, at the beginning of the 20th century and the mid to late 20th century, many other poets were doing. Robert Frost wrote this way. McKay, the founding Harlem Renaissance poet, wrote this way, Auden. So I'm just going to let you know that group exists. But that's not what I'm going to focus on. Because modernism is often seen as a break with the past. Both a formal break, though I don't think it applies as much to that particular team. But also a break in thematic, a break in subject matter, and a break in approach to theme, both modality and theme. So what we see in a lot of contemporary poems is radical subjectivity or radical objectivity or fragmentation or an emphasis on alienation, displacement. These are themes that define our era in poetry. And in contrary distinction to that formalist school, I passed out a sheet that you can all look at. And I have a poem by the founding American father of modern American poetry, William Carlos Williams. When it emphasizes middle name is Carlos, he's a Puerto Rican American poet, also partly a Basque background, a first-generation immigrant. That's important to know that, to understanding his work, it's important to know that. On the right I have a poem by Archie Ammons. This is a contemporary poem. And you can see right away that the contemporary poem owes something or a lot to the William Carlos Williams poem of much earlier close to a century ago. So this is the group. I would put not only William Carlos Williams in this group, but also Gertrude Stein. And I'm going to define this group as the local American modernist group, as opposed to the formalist traditional group. And I thought, just start us off, why don't I just start us off by having us look at these poems so that we can get a feeling of understanding. So a lot of you know this poem, the Red Wheelbarrow. How many people have seen this before? How many people have heard of it? Okay, a lot of us have. How many people are still baffled by it? Don't necessarily understand it, right? Let me read it to you. The Red Wheelbarrow, and this is from a much larger work that is multi-genre and contains a lot of prose and criticism as well, all mixed together. So much depends upon a Red Wheelbarrow, glazed with rain, water, beside the white chickens, end of poem. And some people are perplexed by it nevertheless because it's not an exclamation. So much depends upon ex exclamation point. It's not a complex sentence that has a dependent clause in it. So much depends upon ex that y. It just says so much depends. And that people find a little bit agrammatical or unusual or asymmetrical. But Williams wants that effect. You can't, he's not writing a grammatical sentence. And he wants to do other things like separate the word wheel from the word barrow so that every word gets equal democratic attention. Similarly, if you look at the contemporary poem by Ammons on the right, the spring in her step has turned to fall. We just are watching a woman take a step. And we are also watching the season turn from spring to fall. And we land on fall. That's where the foot comes down. The poem is the action. The poem steers us in the direction that it is going in. And we could talk about it all day. You have no idea how much is going on here. But the point I want to state is that it's not in traditional form. It's everyday data. It's not a regular. It's not a lusive or aerudite. It's attuned to the immediate. And the politics of the poet are liberal. I could say that these are things that apply. These are characteristics that often apply to members of this team. And if we look back over the past century, who are some poets and some schools of poetry that were inspired by the local American modernists, I would say that includes the beat poets, such as Alan Ginsburg. And Williams even included some of Ginsburg's letters in his epic Patterson. It would include the New York School, Kenneth Koch, John Ashbury, who was a big, just died recently a big influence on everyone on this panel, I believe. Or at least on their friends, Frank O'Hara. And for example, Kenneth Koch's one of his most favorite famous poems is entitled Variations on a Theme by William Carlos Williams. You can see the influence just by looking at the title. And then there's Ted Berrigan and Ansem Berrigan, if you want a contemporary poet that's still very much influenced by the New York School. Ergene Young. There's also an objectivist group, Olson and Creeley, or the Black Mountain poets, they're sometimes called, or the language poets. And maybe we'll look in an example of language poetry in a few moments. But that would include Charles Bernstein and Lynn Hagenian. All of these poets claim that they love Williams. They're not particularly fond, for instance, of T.S. Eliot, the next poet I want to talk about. But that Manglan poem I showed you with all the words scattered across the page, very much influenced by Williams. And so it doesn't really matter. You can pick so many contemporary poets, Ellen Bass, Jane Hirschville, Manglan, they've all been influenced by the local American modernists, William Carlos Williams and Gertrude Stein. And their grandfather is Whitman. So for a graphic for this talk, we're originally going to start with an image of Whitman as the grandfather of American poetry. But what he really is, is the grandfather of this strand of American poetry, which has ramified this trunk that has ramified out and created many branches. But Whitman wanted to break the back of the pentameter, and embrace people from all backgrounds and all walks of life, and celebrate the flesh as much as the spirit. But then there's another group, and maybe I'll mention just one or two more groups, because I don't want to go on too long in this introduction. And that would be the classical modernist group. So how many people have heard of T.S. Eliot? Okay, how many people can recite a T.S. Eliot poem by Hart? That's a hard one. It's hard to do. It's harder to do than, but easier than to do with a Bernstein poem, for instance. But if we were to look underneath what I have here at the Red Wheelbar, as a sample, Mr. Eliot's Sunday morning service. Without even reading the poem, you'll see the first word is polyphyloprogenitive. No word is too difficult for Eliot. In other words, it wants to make poetry difficult, and it's deliberate. My students sometimes look for that word in Greek and Latin dictionaries, and they don't find it, because it's not there. Eliot made the word up. It means something like loving to produce much offspring. It has to do with the fertilization of eggs. It has to do with chickens in this sense, and I think we could compare it to the chicken poem by William Carlos Williams. And without reading the entire poem, the sapient settlers of the Lord, those would be the learned it sells people of religion. In the beginning was the word, in the beginning was the word, superfitation of tohen. That's a word in Greek that suddenly appears in the middle of his poem, and what he's talking about is how the learned it sells people of religion, theologians like Origen mentioned in the last line there who castrated himself to bring himself closer to God. Their enterprise is completely futile, because their work, the proliferation of interpretations they offer us, do not bring everyday people closer to the divine. And in that sense, Eliot's frustrated that the erudition and subtlety of these great thinkers is futile, and perhaps Eliot's own poem might be futile if he's trying to reach a deeper truth. And he was. With Ezra Pound, he formed a group of classical modernists who did not like conservatism. They did not necessarily want to preserve 19th century traditions. They wanted to reach back to something more titanic than rationalism, or then market economies, or then perfunctory practices of Christian rituals. They wanted to reach back to a renaissance of the Renaissance, the rebirth of the great rebirth of classical antiquity, and everything it signified for them. So they set the bar at high in terms of their erudition, and what they were seeking spiritually. And in their Eurocentric attitude that they were seeking to embody what is best in the mind of Europe, they believed that Europe had a mind. And Williams rejected all of this. He felt the poetry is not sacred. Poetry does not have a philosophical mission like this. It's not a regular. All those things I said about Williams, Williams hated Elliot. Elliot did not think much of Williams. Williams loved Stein, pounded Elliot work together. And you would think that Elliot wouldn't have many incarnations today, but I gave an example on the right of the contemporary poem Shiloh Church. And you can see right in the second line we get, plan Vistas milky with Jehovah's Calm, so an invocation of the biblical Lord. And it ends with the line in deserts, drop the odd white turds of bone, which is not a good omen. And basically this poet is suggesting that even those who were sacrificing themselves for the noble cause of ending slavery committed great slaughter and therefore believed that they were unredeemable. And so there's a great, or might not be redeemed or that they were sinful. And there's the same sense of futility and historicism and high language in this poem that we find in the Elliot poem. But these are not the only heirs of Elliot. And so what I want to suggest is that Elliot and Williams, if you put them together, if you take Elliot's classicism or at least his architecture and you combine it with Williams' local belief in local modernism, you get other groups of poets like the American Sublime, the Heart Crane, Wallace Stevens group, or the Confessional Poets, the Lowell and Plath and Sexton and Varyman, and I thought maybe I'd give you a couple of examples, one example of a Confessional poem and then I would pretty much end the talk there. But we have this one by Sylvia Plath, Lady Lazarus. Actually put it next to this line from Elliot in Prufrock, I am Lazarus. Come back from the dead. Come back to tell you all. I shall tell you all. There's another side to Elliot to balance their tradition. He often includes his own anguish or expressions of his own anguish in his work. And Confessional poets like Elliot in the Wasteland in this moment describes under that his wife having a nervous breakdown. My nerves are bad tonight. Yes, bad. Stay with me. Speak to me. And that passage ends with I think we are in Rat's Alley where the dead men lost their bones. So you can see the influence on the hill poem, the contemporary poem, but you can also see that Elliot is talking about a problem in his marriage, about a mental breakdown, about his wife's nervous breakdown. And she did end up in an asylum. And Elliot finished the Wasteland while making clay pots in a sanatorium. And he lets you know it in the poem. That's why his influence is so great because a lot of poets in the late 20th century and 21st century are interested in revealing intimate details about themselves in their poems. So this poem by Sylvia Plath for example, in it she describes a suicide attempt or multiple suicide attempts. The second time I meant to last it out and not come back at all, I rocked shut as a seashell. They had to call and call and pick the worms off me like sticky pearls. Dying is an art like everything else. I do it exceptionally well. I do it so it feels like hell. I do it so it feels real. I guess you could say I have a call. And then she did take her own life. So she's revealing how she feels. And Sexton took up poetry when her analyst suggested that it might be cathartic for her. It might be a way for her to deal with her postpartum depression. I also included here we don't have time to talk about it. In the lower left corner of Franz Wright poem, contemporary poet writing in the Confessional mode. And on the next page poems by Tracy K. Smith and Ocean Bong, which I don't think are as raw and intense as the Plath poem, but are still in the Confessional mode. So Sharon Olds, there are many contemporary poets writing in this mode. And other groups that I don't really have time to talk about right now would include the postcolonial poets, Derek Walcott and Company. Or what do you think, for instance, of erasure poems? Is that a new kind of poetry? Or is that just a tool or a technique that poets use to inspire them? What about slam poetry, a new econ poetry? Maybe some of you have heard of that. Heavily influenced by the beat poets, but that's another possible group we could talk about. What about what's happening on the internet today? Tumbler poetry. Is that a good enough platform for poetry? What do people think about conceptual poetry? Maybe Anne Marie or others on the panel could explain what that's about some more. But the point I might end with is that I didn't really have time to talk about Walcott the way I wanted to, but there is also a multicultural postcolonial strand. And I want to suggest that poetry today is much more diverse. So the few strands I gave you merge and some poets are hybrid and there are a lot more women poets and there used to be a lot more openly gay poets and lesbian poets. So poets from Whitman to Ashbury were gay, but they didn't always write about that directly. A lot more recent immigrant poets or poets who write about their background and so forth and so on. So maybe that's one place to look for the difference. And I thought I would just open this up to the panel. Do people on the panel agree with this schema, with this map, or where do we want to take it from here? So. Yes. And I'm going to supplement Stephen's remarks. I'm going to give you the Twitter version of where we've come from and where we are now. And I'm very glad to look at these because these are examples of a lot of what's happened. American poetry today, we are very lucky to be readers of it, which brings me to the question and do not be embarrassed by this. How many of you actually read poetry regularly? Most people do not. Oh, that's wonderful. And a much bigger proportion than usual because usually today people remember poetry from college or they'll see a couple of poems in the New Yorker. They're not really conversant with it. But American poetry is definitely the most diverse energetic poetry in the English-speaking world today. How did we get here? That's what I'm going to talk about briefly. American poetry has always been marked by improvisation and very idiosyncratic invention, especially when we finally turn finally away from European models and from overvaluing all things European in the arts. In this century, the 21st, our poetry is fully, finally, triumphantly American. What does that mean? To better understand where we are now, we can look at where we've been. And here comes the Twitter version of it. American poetry has a forefather, Walt Whitman. And it has a foremother, Emily Dickinson. And in some sense, all later developments point to one or another of these wildly different, wildly idiosyncratic poets. They invented kinds of poetry the world hadn't seen before, which is still going on. And they also invented themselves. The invention of the self is a very American undertaking. And I would argue at the heart of what's happening in poetry right now. A good place to start in recent times, and this is supplementing or complimenting what Stephen said, start with the 1950s, marked by beat poetry, Ginsburg, and a competing formalism, very traditional poems, meter and rhyme. Think of Alan Ginsburg, whom I'm sure most of you have heard of, and Richard Wilbur, who really until 96, still going strong. In the late 50s and the early 60s, confessional poetry dominated as the new thing. And you notice this again as the self. But I would want to say that even when it purports to be your actual self, talking about what's going on in your life, it isn't. It's a linguistic creation of a self that speaks in the poem. Think of Ansexton, Robert Lowell, Sylvia Plath, some of the people that Stephen mentioned. Oh, well, I hope that's not the first time. Here it is, in the late 60s and in the 1970s, language poetry arrives on the scene. And this is an avant-garde movement that's generated instant heated controversy. Traditionally, which I mean hundreds of years, a lyric poem was marked specifically by the creation of a single, stable speaking voice, and a poem that was led by the author to a certain conclusion, in other words, closure. Practitioners and theorists of language poetry insisted no. Language is speaking itself in any given poem. There is no stable single self or speaker. And a reader has to step in to create and make meaning out of a poem. No one authorial voice controls meaning in a poem. I think this is the most significant thing that happened in this very brief history. This poem also raises closure, bringing you to the neat end you'll be familiar with in any traditional poem. Instead, a poem is a process and it stays open-ended. These poetry wars raged for decades and they were heated. Uptown mainstream traditional versus downtown, experimental, innovative, resisting belief in a single self and in the authorial imposition of meaning. And you can think of the movements really geographically as centered Uptown, 92nd Street High, downtown, St. Mark's, and the poetry project. But what happened is that where we are now is that gradually poets writing simply took devices from every point on the poetic spectrum, a lot of which Stephen has touched on. So what were once bitterly thought and contested ideological matters simply were co-opted as techniques that a poet would deploy to expand his or her expressive range, which is very much what I do and almost everyone I know does. For example, collage, fragmentation, multiple voices speaking within a poem, disjunctive development, great big leaps from one thing to another, and very quick shifts of tone and speech registers. The distinctivity of distinctions between high culture and popular culture. So you could say no more Uptown or downtown, everybody's gone to Brooklyn, which is where we are now geographically. I'll say a couple more things. External conditions have radically impacted poetry today and one very important development in my opinion is the diminished influence of the gatekeepers. I don't want to put a particular, what I'd say the last 10, 20 years, to get your poems into publication you would pass through an elaborate series of people who put their imprement to her on yes, this is worthy of publication. But recently, journals and presses have proliferated and the web provides another very far-reaching and very different means of disseminating poems, which I'm happy polo is going to talk about. Which though certainly not all of the most interesting work in poetry is coming out of small independent presses. And there's no one kind of poetry that predobinates it, Stephen's also indicated. An anecdote here a few years ago, the National Book Awards, the five finalists for poetry were all from tiny little barely known presses, which understandably annoyed the more commercial and mainstream presses who after all as they pointed out were funding these awards. So that mistake got corrected in the next series of national poetry awards. At this moment, I conclude there is no center in American poetry, but at any given moment, one or another of these many strands you mentioned tend to be highlighted or spotlighted. So right now for example, we're hearing more from traditionally underrepresented voices. Here's an example. Besides Frank B. Dar who won the National Poetry Award this year, two of the four finalists drew on their experiences, African-Americans, and the third drew on her experience as a Lakota Indian, Native American. The other big thing that I notice and you'll all notice is as you'd expect there's an outpouring of poems responding politically to the dire situation, the country and in fact the world is finding itself in. I'm struck by the melding of political response with intense lyricism, which is something new in political or social response poetry. Ocean Vuon, you have an example there, his new book, his only book, Night Sky with Exit Wounds is an example of this. He is a Vietnamese-born refugee, but there is no center now and no one kind or kinds of poems that predominate. It's good that there's no center. I agree. One way in which you evaluate any country or any time period in literature is to go to see who's publishing these particular writers. For the poets especially, the literary journal, literary review, literary magazine however you call it, whether in print or online and if online, whether it also involves audio, that's there may be hundreds, probably more than a thousand literary journals and they're not all doing the same thing. There is going to be some overlap on what people consider to be good poetry. It will, in what Patricia and Stephen have talked about, they will be representing certain kinds of poetry, styles of poetry, certain modes, whether it's formal or not. But I think there's a kind of poetry for every kind of person. Unfortunately, schools where we get poetry from the beginning don't represent the wide variety of poems available that people are writing. Literary journals are the means by which poets get read. There should be wider reading of the literary journals but online there's a wider readership. It takes a long time to put together a collection of poetry as a book. So the magazines support writers and give them readers. They're stepping stones in some cases, some smaller magazines read the larger magazines. But one thing that they do represent is all the different subjects that you could be writing about. Surfing, beekeeping, art, science, math, money. No matter who you are, if you have an ability to write about something in the form of a poem, a poem can be a form of communication, a way to almost a different kind of language by which to talk about something. And it is also its own form. But so while there are many general interest literary journals, Barrow Street would be one, Kenyan review, Agni, all of those that are in essence interested in whatever you may want to send them if you write in the way that they deem is good poetry. There are lots of magazines that want very specific subjects. I don't know. That's an anthology on food. But there's a specific magazine called Alimentum, who's the publisher is a chef and a poet. And they take poetry and fiction and nonfiction about food. But the food verse contest out of literal latte is also an option. I have a huge number of my own poems in this book so we don't even know if it's an anthology or a book of recipes. But this is what we can do today. There doesn't necessarily have to be. The rules are there are lots of ways to blur boundaries. And there are lots of points I could pick up but I'll let you finish. Yes. And I would just want to mention that there's a poet laureate of the Union Square Green Market. There is a perfect example. There's never anything that you can't write about or some post you can't have in poetry. And for the time there are two off the bat that I can think of literary journals focused on work and being out of work. There's one called Draft Horse. And there's one called Work. That's an online magazine. And they have a very nondescript white sort of background so that if you want to read it at work and look like you're just looking at it, not looking at a magazine. But these are like any kind of work, blue collar, white collar, pink collar, sex work, volunteer, anything they say. There's Jay Journal, which is out of the John Jay School of Criminal Justice. And they want justice, just the letter J. There's the five two crime poetry weekly. And there's politics and ends up in most successfully and everywhere. But new verse news, the Boston Review, which is a magazine that doesn't have to take poetry on politics but has a focus overall in the magazine on progressive politics. There's pop culture and is wanted by many magazines, but it's all that barrel house wants. Everything, poetry fiction, nonfiction, if it doesn't have pop culture, send it elsewhere they say. But Gargoyle, they like history and subculture and culture and pop culture. The largest areas now are the health injury illness death as represented in these magazines that come out of medical universities by and large. There's Bellevue Literary Review, which is actually out of NYU Medical. These are edited by doctors and nurses who may also be writers as well as some writers who are not in the medical fields. They want, that magazine tends to, so they ushered in this idea, but there are now, that I've counted 29 that come out of medical universities. There's the Healing Muse up in one of the SUNY colleges bioethics. They like a little more of a lyric poem than a narrative poem that Bellevue likes. And then there's hospital drive down in Virginia. There's one that's not associated with a medical program, Recovery, which is an online magazine. They spell it rk.v.ry. That's all for definition, well, among the, write something about, from one of the four definitions of recovery, which can include also obtaining usable resources from unusable sources, but it can also be recovery that isn't successful. You can write along a wide range of health and injury related subjects. And then the other big area is the nature environment ecology place. And if you, if you just want to write about the pleasure of nature and human interaction, Snowy Eagret is one, maybe eco tone. And if you want to write about the ecology, there's poecology, there's a precipitate journal and avel set and about place that are interested in the more environmental, the loss of nature rather than the pleasures of nature. And I don't know, there's step away magazine if you want to write about neighborhoods. There's just everything out there. That's a start. There's so much more I would say. But you know, and it goes into books, of course. There's one of my favorite more recent books is by Nick Lance. It's called We Don't Know We Don't Know. And he uses either Pliny the Elder or Donald Rumsfeld quotes. So the We Don't Know We Don't Know is a Donald Rumsfeld quote. And he uses elliptical, elliptical quality of those statements in poems about very serious things as well as humor. So even if we're just talking about poems about nature and place, I can think of a few more like terrain.org is just about the environment built or natural. And there are others like Appalachia people are going camping and want to read a poem when they're learning how to make a tent. So what Amy's suggesting is just the diversity and the range of subject matter that is sometimes a revelation to people. But to also speak to a point that, and I think that Paolo's going to want to pick up a little bit on the point about the homogenization in education or something like, no, okay, not necessarily. Okay, but I think I first want to pick up on the point that Patricia raised about the fragmentation of voices in contemporary poetry. And I was going to ask, how would we make a distinction then between, because there's one thing that I tried to point out is that we can draw a line from poets earlier in the modern era to poets who are contemporary. It seems that as soon as this was happening, as soon as modernism cracked the egg, so to speak. And I was suggesting, kind of giving an answer, Elliot kind of wanted to put the chicken back into the egg. But he ends his wasteland with a pistiche of different languages. And it's somewhat radical to a modern reader. He called it classicism, but it can look like craziness. The end of the wasteland goes like this. Shall I set my lands in order? And then the next slide is, por esas cosi ne que yafina cuando, fiam ootie keli down oo swallow swallow. And the plants that we tan ollato averi, these fragments I have short against my ruins. London Bridge is falling down, falling down, falling down. Why then I'll fit you. Hirani Mo is mad again. Datta, dham yatta, di yadvam. Chantish, shantish, shantish. So that's Elliot's version of classicism. But to us it might sound like craziness. More poets today in their embrace of different voices in different languages doing something different from what Elliot is doing. Well, I think what Elliot is doing in that sense is formal and technical. It's a tissue of voices. But I also want to suggest that Elliot had a pretense of objectivity in that he's writing about a disarray and a dissolution of Western civilization. But more and more when people read Elliot, it's pretty clear he's talking about his own psyche. And this is far more personal poetry than Elliot would ever have acknowledged. In fact, almost all of Elliot's notes and essays, and he's not alone among poets in doing this. Most poets develop anesthetics or a poetics that happens to be what they're doing. And he was no exception to that. In his view, you couldn't be subjective. You had to be objective, but almost everything he does is subjective. Here is what I would say about Elliot. The difference between Elliot and what happened in what I consider to be current happens in that fault line when you move to language poetry. And it's very connected. I don't know how many of you remember the 70s or have read about? They're intensely theoretical. That's where I may add importation mostly of European ideologies. Again, it's not really American. And that's what the cracking of the self is coming from. And where I would draw the fault line is really in a self-conception of the self. I think that what happened is people, both culturally and ideologically, lost the sense that they were one person. And now that doesn't mean there aren't people writing eye poems. Of course, there are. It's a lyric. I did this. I love this one. I feel this way. But it's a constructed eye. And a stable self has simply dropped out of the equation. And that's where I would draw the distinction. That wouldn't have been something that Elliot himself writing about would have acknowledged or any of the other people. So I would draw it. Modernism is considered to be the cracking and destruction of the past. Postmodernism is considered to be a return to that, but in an ironic way. And I would want to suggest that what's happening now is really something different. And then it's back to that conception and reinvention of a multiple self. If you look, actually, if you think about yourself for a minute, aren't you kind of one person on Monday at four and another person Thursday at seven? And it's that sensibility that I think has crept across all of these different schools. And the one other thing I want to say is I think that we are, which is helpful, all of us, dividing poems and poets into schools and into movements. But when you come right down to it, every strong poet is a school of one. And these groups that we all do, that I did it myself, they're birds eye or schematic maps. But like a map, you know, if you get right down on the ground, an area that looks as if you could group it. No, there's a rock here. There's a pond here. And they are, in fact, quite individual and idiosyncratic. That would be my long answer to your somewhat short question. Right. So we went from a time where people, especially those with a Eurocentric leaning, were having a crisis of faith. And they're representing a kind of trauma. Also associated with, you know, became a kind of trauma that a lot more people could relate to once World War I hit and so forth. And, you know, people asked if civilization was moving backwards as we just developed greater weapons and greater ways of creating mass destruction and so forth. So there's a lot of trauma that underlies the fragmentation and even the fragmentation of voices. But what I think Patricia is saying is people, you know, across the modern era, writers and artists learned to also embrace the fragmentation and to see it as an expression of just ones. Well, think of it the way the Buddhists will say that there is no self that once fundamental humanity depends on not being attached to that ego. There's a tortured quality to some who let go of that ego and others celebrate that. And I think the ones that celebrate it more are more influenced by that local American modernist group. The fragmentation in Williams is very different from the fragmentation in Eliot. But I thought I'd give an example. I have this poem by Charles Bernstein. Just a fragment. And again, you know, the, well, this is, he sometimes categorizes a language poet and they trace their influence to new school poets who loved Williams. But take this harrow off my chest. I don't feel it anymore. It's getting stark to stark to see. I feel I'm barking at hell's spores, the new sentence. What is the eye in that poem? Is that the speaker or is that coming out of a Bob Dylan song? Or have I just given too much away? But you know, there's a way in which the part of the language is appropriated as earlier modernists. Eliot Pound appropriated a lot of foreign languages and even whole lines from other texts into their work. But here it's much more playful. I don't think he's making some grand statement about civilization. And it's a medium for play. I'm barking at hell's spores, hell's spores, heaven's door. The words correspond and yet we're almost saying the opposite. But we're not really talking about hell the way a confessional poet would. I wanted to say I think actually this poem is about language poetry. The new sentence is a very influential book, criticism written by Ron Siliman. Yes. Right. And Charles Bernstein is based in the East Coast and the term language poetry is an arbitrary designation for a group of poets primarily in the Bay Area, some in the East Coast, who were reading marks very deeply and considering capital and its relation to language. And in the new sentence, Ron Siliman, he's exploring and I'm just generalizing here because he explores a lot. Parataxis, you have syntax where you have word order, right, determining meaning, then you have hypotaxis, which is the kind of sentence that James Baldwin was great at, a lot of subordinate clauses. And they have parataxis, which I think ancient Greek is in, where you don't really know every word isn't in its rightful order. And so that opens up meaning. And Gertrude Stein is considered to be still even a limit for language writing and a goddess and a god for language writers because her writing truly desenters, opens up the English sentence and maybe open as a euphemism, right, destroys it, right? And that has everything to do with her growing up hearing and speaking four languages, being queer, Jewish and occupied France, living in France as an American, right? And really writing at midnight till six in the morning, right, when everyone's asleep, right? And so your brain is not really paying much attention to word order at that time, right? But she embraced that negative capability. So I think also with Charles Bernstein, who I know personally, he's also interested in the tradition of Jewish comics coming out of the Catskills. And so there's a playfulness that is very specific to his work that you will not find in other language poets. But I'm so glad you mentioned playfulness, no quote. And so did Stephen. I didn't mean, please go on. Oh, okay. I just wanted to add my two cents. I don't have an elaborate outline prepared. I just want to say in terms of how I see poetry being different today, there's a lot more diversity, right? And by diversity, I mean, you have a lot of poets of color with first books, a lot of well, the last 35 years, I think there have been more female poets being published. But now you have a lot of poets of color, a lot more women poets, a lot of GLBT poets, a lot of trans poets were not just coming out with collections, but gaining visibility because their books are actually being given awards. I think the first book of trans poetry came up, came out two years ago, published by Night Poet Books, which published my last full collection. And you actually see poetry bestsellers. Claudia Rankine, who has a background in experimental poetry, she published Citizen, which has sold an astonishing number of copies, right? So maybe that also speaks to the moment that we're in that's unique, where we are dealing with social, right, in a way that we haven't before because of the mediums that are disposal to engage with it, right? So you have Rupi Karr, I don't know if you've read Rupi Karr, K-A-U-R, she's from Toronto, she's South Asian Canadian. She was publishing her poetry on Tumblr, I believe, and a mass or Instagram, and a mass like a following of two million followers, and she's published three books of poems that are bestsellers, number one on Amazon, everywhere, right? And you couldn't see more diverse aesthetics in these two best-selling poets, right? They have a very popular populist poet and Rupi Karr, and then you have Claudia Rankine, whose work is challenging, right? I also wanted to say perhaps these sensations are also made possible because of social media. I don't think Claudia Rankine has a very palpable digital footprint, but certainly her press does. Most poetry publishers, let's bear in mind, like most of us poets are published by small presses, it's a gift economy, right? But let me correct that by saying their poets were making a lot of money these days, and they have careers, right? But social media, you get on YouTube, you get on Instagram, you know, Lin-Manuel Miranda was in the White House dropped that Hamilton piece, and that was it, right? I mean, it's more than that, he worked his butt off for that and it was a build up, but yeah, social media can really give you a visibility and then an agency that poets 10 years ago couldn't enjoy, right? Now having said that, and I mentioned poets have careers now, there's a professionalization of poetry, right? Like you have career tracks as a poet. Poets have agents now, right? They do, like they have agencies, there are three big agencies now. If you want a book of poets, you got to talk to their agent, right? That's relatively new, right? They used to be exclusive to folks' big names, you know? But now it's not so exclusive, folks with first books that make a mark digitally, they had agents, right? And that's also, I think, a phenomenon made possible because of rise in prominence and prevalence of the MFA. MFA programs, right? That's a master of fine arts, so creative writing programs, which we're not nearly so numerous even a few decades ago as they are now. Now every university and community college has one, right? So probably you seem to be saying that it's something of a mixed bag that there might be poets that we've heard of like Rupi Kaur, but at the same time you're saying that that getting known might depend on the internet or depend on how a press promotes the work. And yet to take the Rupi Kaur example then to write in a way that's suitable for an Instagram post, you have to write really short poems that would appeal to everyone, and you might actually sell over a million books between one and two million books when you put them together in a book, but is this really the way to construct the best poems, is online construct? Because I mean, poesis, the Greek word means a made thing. Is there enough of an artifact there or enough agency on the part of the poet? Or is it a matter of pursuing what's trending or a matter of pursuing the bigger audience as you move? And does that take us out of the creative space that a lot of poets would want to operate in? And that's a question that you might be raising. Well, I guess in terms of, I mean, there's no questioning taste, and I'm always hesitant to sort of qualify a poet's work. I'm always mindful of Gertrude Stein's reception. Right. Right. Look, now she's undeniably one of the greats and she's still influencing poets. But what fascinates me about Rupi Kaur is the platform that enabled her success. Right. Instagram. Which is also the platform, Instagram, Twitter, you got to have a Twitter handle. You don't have to, but that's how a lot of poets coming up are thinking. Like they feel that it's incumbent on their career that they have a digital presence or digital citizenship. Get an Twitter account. You have a nice author photo that gives you traction. Right. But it makes you write very short poems. Not necessarily. I think what's interesting then maybe for me, my question would be, well, let's talk about that. Like these platforms that are enabling greater visibility for poets. And then we can talk about the poetry after. I always am mindful of the fact that myself personally, I've been Facebook free for eight years. 12 point. This is way before the fake news scandal. But I was always very uncomfortable about it just because it was so distracting from writing poem for me. It's so hard to do that to begin with. And so what I think my point is that you've got Tumblr, you've got Facebook, you've got Instagram, Twitter, they're owned by billionaires. Right. So there's an inescapable matrix there of poetry and capital that is new but is not discussed. Right. So I think as a poet, what you make your poems on now is definitely something that I think about. And who am I giving it to? Not to be a paranoid or anything but I think about it because I'm going to be giving money to, I don't want to get, you know, I can fight the power on Twitter but what's his name is cashing it in? A person who runs Twitter. You're probably looking at the only two Facebook free poets in the country. You're gathered right here. Dead. It's, you know, the professional, I'm thinking about it just in what's come up two things. One is the professionalization of poetry which is actually an odd and rather modern thing. There didn't used to be a career track but there absolutely is now complete with resumes and credits in a mess. That's partly because although there are some poets on the net and that's just going to increase who can actually make money at this. Most poets still cannot. They're dependent on a day job and the day job has increasingly been in the university which has also had an effect on the poetry. It's a cyclical feedback kind of thing I think. And then the second part of that that I wouldn't want to lose is play which you brought up and which Paolo brought up. You can forget about all of this that the purpose of poetry is pleasure and the way to read a poem is to immerse yourself and experience the poem and you mentioned negative capability and it was Keats thing about poetry is ruined for many people. I'm happy that I read it way before I ever got any of it in school. It's taken into school and what is this poem saying? No, that's not what poems are doing. What they're doing is setting forth something in a dance with the language that creates pleasure, play and the meaning of the experience which you will only feel if you let yourself experience it. So as though we're trying to map it here we all know and you all know too that's really not the poetry escapes that and it's not where it should be. It's only a useful way of doing it. I don't know what's going to happen. I still don't, when you look at the history of poetry which I tend to take a long view of, really a very long view of, going back actually a couple thousand years, what survives? What survives of people's poems at the most is a handful of really good poems and I think that's going to be the same thing. That isn't to say that I don't have a negative or positive view of what's going on now. It's one way of disseminating it. Claudia ranking to me is a superb poet. I really love her work. And what she did in her book particularly called Don't Let Me Be Lonely is she put all kinds of logos and things from newspapers and all kinds to give you the felt sense. What is it like? What does it feel like to be an American at this moment? I really don't know any book that does it as well. That's what poetry can do. But the other thing I'd say is that Keats referred to poets as possessing negative capability which is the ability to take something in without he said any irritable reaching after reason. I would want to suggest that that's not about poets. That's about the way everybody should be reading poems. You should look at your own response first. And then you can say afterward, well what in this poem gave me that response? And the last thing I'd say is about poetry always pulling two ways. It's language so it may look more intellectual to people than it in fact is. But it's words on a page and in one way they're pulling toward meaning but in the other way they're pulling toward sheer play, tending toward music and that's where you see Stephen's great examples. Even look at the Bernstein, look what he's doing with rhyme in there. W.H. Auden when he was judging the Yale series, Younger Poets, he said and he also edited a book called Good Bad Poetry which was just a whole lot of things, Ogden Nash kinds of things and liberal kinds of things and he said, I have much more confidence in a poet who is just playing around with everything. Reverse of it than I do in anybody who is more purportedly serious. So that would be my take on this phenomenon and I like Paolo have no idea what's going to happen now that you can sell a million copies of something. I still think a handful of poems are going to survive of anybody's. Well, it is very hard to know the trajectory of something that's very big at one time might not be so significant later. To take an example from England, we went back a hundred years, the most renowned poet would be Robert Bridges poet laureate of England and an unknown poet who he was actually aware of but nobody knew who he was was, Dr. Anli Hopkins. Hopkins was published, he died in his 40s, was published after his death and if you look at anthologies, there is some point where Robert Bridges disappears and Hopkins becomes because he invented his own language, becomes the forebear of a whole, you know, talk about play, you know, a dappled, dawn drawn falcon. Is that a falcon drawn by the dawn or is that a falcon drawn like a picture in the dawn or is the dawn drawing the falcon? He just created compound complex words that no one had ever seen before in language combinations and I think there are poets now doing them just to talk about play so I'm segging into this comment on play, you know, like Bill Nott who invented his own language or Joan Houlahan, I mean, most people don't know who they are because people really want narrative very often. That's something they can get right into but those poets are not all that well known necessarily but they might end up being much more important in the long run and so it takes a while for all these things to sort out to talk about reception. Well, I want to also add in about play and also about the platform and back to the editors, the more curious and flexible editors of magazines is that if you do, there are Twitter, there are a lot of magazine editors who are on Twitter and they, and so if you're a poet, you can find out about things and they post when poems are published but they also have Twitter-specific contests and little things. So you're writing these tiny things. So maybe it's not what you're going to do all the time but it's another way in which to play and be confined by something and then to create within a form which is part of what poetry does and other platforms are like that. Well, Iku and perfect that. Well, yes, they do have specific Iku ones but they also have other kinds of poems and then you can also do it with us as we know a series of tweets can create a poem. You don't have to, just like it can be a rant. So I would say that the language is first, I agree, in a poem and just what that language is matters to a whole lot of different people in a whole lot of different ways. So, yes. Well, one would think, I mean, Natasha Saye asked Campbell McGrath who does really interesting work with pop culture and so forth but that makes political statements. What do you think of Twitter approaches over? He said it seems like now because we have these short-form platforms that would be perfect for haikus and everyone would be writing great haikus but that's not really happening and perhaps because it's all disposable. It's a disposable context and people don't really want to stop and think about a poem all day, they want to keep swiping. And poetry really requires sustained attention. The play is play but it takes a while to sink in and it's a very kind of artful chaos even when it looks chaotic. For example, if we look at the Gertrude Steinpum which strikes me, I put it next to the Bernstein poem because it's also based on music. And people will look at it and see sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet tea, Susie Asado, sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet tea, Susie Asado, first of all, it sounds good. So we're already, there are things we like to say like when Wallace Stevens says, be, be, finale of Seam, you just want to keep saying that and I think that's part of the appeal. You might not realize that Susie Asado is a flamenco dancer and she's imitating, I wouldn't say imitating because she's not a representative poet, she's embodying the sound of the flamenco dance. And I wish I could stand up and dance a little bit but it's like, sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet, sweet, tea, Susie Asado. So the language is its own music. And then if you look at the syntax, there's no one more radical today. Susie Asado is a told trayshore. A lean on the shoe, this means slip slips hers. It's completely ungrammatical but people will even look at told trayshore and they'll see a tray there and maybe the tea could go on a tray and that would be domestic calm that could contrast with the passion of the flamenco dancer or maybe trayshore is T.R.E.S. S.U.R.E. like the French word placeu or maybe it's treasure like something we really value and the opportunity to just play with words and associations is great and yet she didn't want us to as say a confessional poet like Plath or a poet like Elliot might have wanted to to say, you know, I think we are in Vat Sali where the dead men lost their bones. You say Vat Sali could be the trenches of World War I. You're comparing the breakup in your marriage to world, to a battle and she didn't want to do that. But yet the words clean to wipe them free of the associations with which you come to them and you know it's striking to see how much the language poets can resemble a poet who really just founded the movement you know much earlier in the modernist era. But Stein actually was trying to be a bestseller, right? She wrote books that she would be on the way out of Vat Sali's book which was written to make money and be a bestseller. And she became the bestseller. But she felt bad about it. She wanted it right like this but she couldn't get published. But you know what she never was accepted as much in the ivory tower and you can find this you know with the poet. There are those who are accepted more in that kind of, it's the way the beat poets had a hard time getting accepted as establishment writers. They were viewed as activists who just, the way perhaps they're followers of the New Eurekans poets today and slam poetry. I mean some of it is not good. I mean we have to admit because it's poetry for everybody. But some of it you know is based on written poems that are actually, that's why I put a slam poem next to a Ginsburg poem so you can see the you know really it's obviously coming out of Ginsburg. But people are still writing like this. I'm not going to read it to you but it's very political as Ginsburg was and as Whitman was. Different kinds of political you don't have to be, you know like the social issues are a political way of you could write about violence, you could write about not being able to find a job. You could write about all kinds of social issues and be in a in a in some way or have a social conscious without it being the upper politics of you know what's happening in the presidential office. There are all kinds of politics and then there's a and then you can have it almost back rounded in a poem. You can you know they're all different ways and again lots of and you mention New Eurekans because another way in which poets are supported in by support not just you know being heard having their poems heard is by giving readings or performances of their work and that's another there's a set of people who are running regular reading series around any around the country in any city and in suburbia to libraries, cafes, bars, universities, literary centers and and those people are also flexible in in who they present and it's up to the audiences just as it's up to the readers to help determine who should be who should continue really being heard. Part of what everybody loved Gritard Stein was because she was so different they liked that they didn't she didn't make the ivory tower certainly ones who came after. But they wouldn't publish this stuff. They she had no idea. The later people loved her. But even so apparently in our archive they yelled there's a thousand pages of unduplish writing. I think the poets really. The poets who based themselves. We forget because we you know we edit when we look back at history we forget how radical and how maligned she might have been in certain circles and that's what I'm saying. But it is tricky because there are you know you go to some open night night and people are reading off you know cocktail napkins and a lot of it is just awful and that could be true of a lot of slam poetry but if it's a gateway drug that brings people into the art form maybe that's all that matters. But there are lots of people who believe that yes in performance writing that it really ought to work on the page or be more about this. So you know there is good and bad in every yeah and we know that the more that we are immersed in our own field there's always the good and the bad. The poets used to have it all I mean there was the Iliad and then you know two millennia later there was war in peace and it all the popular genre became the novel and so a lot of questions that what poet struggle with is how to reach that audience without you know because we don't want to say what what reaches a bigger audience is better or that what's even what's what's more moral is better I mean that seems desirable but you know maybe that's not possible maybe there could be you know just because it's well meaning it doesn't always mean that it works as great art but there is that challenge to try to reach out and at the same time preserve a certain amount of integrity and I think I don't know maybe I'm just free associating what do you think. So but at the same time I think these avant-garde movements even when they're a little bit rough around the edges often have much more to them than people recognize at the time so people might have looked at that Richard Simon thought it was just drag I mean and now I think a lot of people reject a lot of work because they think that it's not formal enough for them or but they also rejected because they think the opposite you know maybe it's to ivory tower so I think everything has to be taken on its own term. I'm not sure the ivory tower in that sense really exists anymore I know exactly what you're talking about but that's what I meant by the gatekeepers have gone and that has also to do with the way MFA programs have moved into the universities it's a feedback loop both ways. But isn't that a kind of gatekeeper system because there are all these programs where people are taught to write a certain way they can't start with the spoken word the way writers of the Iliad did and then move on to something else they have to start writing short poems that follow certain criteria. I don't really think that's true about MFA programs I think they get a bad rap I think it just depends who's teaching them I understand what you mean it does put a certain constraint around what's happening you know the the common thought about MFA programs is they're just producing a lot of people who are writing perfectly crafted poems all of them a muchness and nothing really exciting but you know in any age there's only ever been a couple of people who were any good and would last all you have to do is look at the 16th century when the sonic comes along I unfortunately have looked at these there are hundreds of these utterly forgettable sonic sequences that were extremely popular in their own day and I think that's the equivalent of what's happening now you know we don't know till 50 or 100 years who the people are going to be that people will still be reading we can't tell that now but I think they're there I don't and I don't I don't see formal academic rejection the way they're used to be there certainly what where you wouldn't let certain things in and you would just let the curriculum alone if you look at it it's broadened in a certain way that I don't know I can think of a large number of poets though that talk a lot about how much rejection they're getting yes and so forth so it's not as if there is I mean there are certain rules you're supposed to follow think even about poetry books what if you tried to write a poetry book that you didn't put any blurbs on it and there was nothing on the cover this would affect its reception that's there are certain that's definitely the profession that's the professionalization at the same time I think Rope Rupi Khar to go back to her she published herself I think she self published and then it sold so many copies on Amazon and then a big press latched onto her and that's what's happened yes so I think I do I do agree with you that the MFA is really powerful right now the the desire to write poetry and publish a poet feeling incumbent to enroll in the MFA and unfortunately most MFA programs only admit 10 people per year so there is gatekeeping that's happening and who gets to teach in these programs yeah it's sort of like connect the dots and the the template for poetry that in the MFA programs is adopted is still the traditional lyric narrative poem which is a long tradition that you so but and so if you are writing left of center if you are exploring performance poetry right here there are programs that would would would accept you but you have to do a little bit of research and perhaps a great equalizer or the great Satan depending on who you ask is the internet where your benefit as a reader I think you're at a very very golden age for experiencing so many different types of poems and poets more so than ever before right that's my democratic point that's it there's another way now yeah it's another instance of gatekeeping gates falling down gatekeepers there on on to the net to go to performance poetry for a minute because that's so important I mean poetry began obviously in the oral tradition there are no cultures ever been without poetry and really until very recently there were still cultures like in Yugoslavia when people wanted to know about Homer they sent somebody to Yugoslavia where they were still repeating epics orally the tradition it's gone now but only the last like 40 years something like that but here's the thing about performance poetry it's I agree with Amy there is no kind of poetry that doesn't yield I think we all agree with this really good instances of what it is it's not the kind of thing you're doing it's how well are you doing it so for performance poetry the question is if you want to translate it you may take the position that you don't want to translate it to the printed page you're only about the spoken word but if you want to translate it then you have to put it on the printed page so that a reader who is unaccompanied by you reading it will hear what it ought to sound like which I think a number of performance poets are able to do to make that transition from one to the other because there's also a lot of publishers publishing a lot of performance poets who want to be published in book form yes so it's not just that they want to remain in the public in the no no I'm saying that yes I'm going along with that and yeah so it is hard to regain the oral tradition but this might be one way in which were reminded of it and that certain groups of poets are keeping the the eye on what poems sound like when they are read out loud or and I think that really if a poem to be worth its salt it has to it has to sound right yes and Amy brought up readings which is a good thing readings have proliferated it's another way of disseminating it and I noticed just from when I used to go to readings when I was a lot younger poets read terribly they were almost embarrassed to be reading as if it was something that took away from the sacredness of the page so they would read in a certain poetry voice to get anybody which was over inflated and pretentious I opened the door to the twilight sort of things unbearable there's been a feedback loop where poets read much better they write differently because the reading to audiences you know it works when you're reading a poem my poems got a lot better when I started doing a lot of reading because I understood what worked not just on a page in reading so I would want to add that yes I want to say that I actually disagree I think the oral tradition has never been more popular in fact I'd say the most popular poetry has never been more popular if we are going to keep an open mind and accept hip hop and rap oh that's what I said yeah and right it's because of hip hop and rap that we have seek tremendous diversity in terms of young people who are taking a chance at expressing themselves and instinctively going to the poem but it's actually not instinctively because they've grown up listening to this very old tradition of poetry oral poetry which is and rappers are great great poets of our age I know I agree with that yeah straight white male except for Eminem I'm not sure what made you think I was disagreeing with that I'm saying the opposite that readings are one of the most important ways that the oral stuff is disseminated and I also would want to say if you look at a poem I hope people go and read lots of poems if you go look at a poem it's ego that gets in the way when you're a grown up when you're a kid you hear something think about the way kids parody a poem you know we remember light a match and watch it watch the schoolhouse burned ashes sort of thing they just look at a poem and they don't feel that they're challenged to understand it and if you go back as an adult and you just read a poem the best way to pick up your point power is just read it aloud and listen to yourself and if you do that a couple times you will understand what that poem means it will it will come into you because that's where it is but one thing about rap is that it is performed with instrumentation or with singing voices and I think that it also has a lot more followers than poetry I mean we're talking the you know the not just I mean I say it's unheard of to sell a million poetry books but to sell rap music for an album for a song to go platinum it's no big deal really so the question the poet stories asking themselves is how especially in this day and age where there are some poets just like conceptual poets that are using appropriated material and there is no political meaning to what they're doing it's not about social engagement and right next to that we've got other writers I think Powell mentioned the diversity of poetry today I mean I mentioned the Harlem Renaissance we can draw a line from there to the Black Arts movement of Brooks and Baraka and how activist they were in their time and well you know if you go to St. Ross you know I don't know Rosk's poem on Eric Garner even if he makes an important statement or a sensitive statement about that who will really see that how I accept other poets and so it's a question we have to ask is there a way to that poets can reach out especially this time where so many poets want to be activist and I don't know if we really have a a platform for doing that because poetry requires that one not right propaganda that every line has to be its own it has to undercut itself on so many levels when I hear politicians use lines out of poetry they almost invariably use them incorrectly or demonstrate they don't understand the work but I think right now it's a very challenging time for the the poets who want to be socially engaged and want to you know convey their responsibility to make a difference go ahead yes I actually don't think so I think poets have always been the first to respond with language in response situations it's just in our culture in the United States we don't really care as much about poets giving voice to but we're experiencing comparative Mexico compared to South America where poets actually have a voice in terms of expressing what's going on in creative events I would argue that a lot of publishers right now when they're publishing poets they want to look for poets who are engaged. But I do. Yeah but let's go back to 9-11 which is not that long ago how did people grieve most people who don't really write poetry their first instinct was to write poem and I went to Union Square so many poems Angel Island right the immigrants are denied immigration the Chinese are non-European Americans I mean they wrote poems instinctively I just think that you know it's now seems to be there's greater agency for you to be a poet who is socially engaged combination of social media combination of the visibility of poetry and combination of I mean hip hop right hip hop rap has always been about what's going on social in social realm so it seems that you also for a moment talked about poetry as therapy which is because it goes back to what I said about Sexton yeah but it's interesting on the other hand I'm not sure that that always works because poetry and psychology is a very big theme but for instance friends right when his father James Wright found out that he had become a poet he said to his son welcome to hell and I mean I like the saying that I like to say that a sad poet is a happy poet but really it is a whether poetry really works as you know as a way to grieve it seems like it should be cathartic but it also can become an obsession or a dark obsession of sorts and I don't know. It's about transformation love of what's dark that's the difference transformation through language it's like opera you ask yourself why is this pleasurable they're all dead or Shakespeare tragic but it is and because it's been transformed through the art. The terrible view is born well you know well yes but the other thing is you know we're talking about terms of reaching people which is important in all of us who love poetry would like poems to reach more people but they may never and when you think about it in absolute numbers they're probably because there are so many people alive the tiny percentage here that are reading it or interested in it probably are more than people who've ever lived at any other time and it does it ever have to be just about rap on you're bringing that up because I grew up in New York and they are street rhythms and I was so struck with that I just saw Hamilton and this is the thing it was completely it wasn't a gimmick it was so appropriate because the American poetry finally come into its own in this century partly through those responses because our revolution was a thrusting upward from the ground up and the city of these energies that couldn't be contained and that's what you hear in rap and hip hop and it's wonderful because the second act of that is a really very sad act it's devolved from that into politics as usual but there it is. Well does anyone have any questions? I think the microphone works if you can. I am a singer and I live in an artist's building on the west side. We have a group of people who have met for more than ten years every other week who get together and read poetry we read what we've written we read whatever interests us and we always discuss it in terms of what can we know about the poet what was going on at that time and it's just been extraordinarily valuable for us as a venue for us to find out what's universal where we are in our growth in ten years we have people in their nineties two people in their nineties one two people in their seventies people in their sixties people in their thirties about eight people that show up for this thing and the growth that we've all had by reading aloud every week and we read poems more than once and ask and we're not area died to say I don't know what this means what do you think this no one's trying to be crazy about their ego with it it's really there for an exploration and I think it's the universal and necessary expression for us to experience intimacy through writing and I think it's very exciting that the written word is happening on the internet I have a young niece in rural Massachusetts who listens to who reads a ruby car and she's a young woman finding out about her own voices a woman and here's here's a great venue for her and this is a kid who would never be exposed to poetry so I think there's a lot of hope about what's going on and I'm very happy to have listened so nice so there are more avenues for people to share their work and yeah for published work to be accessible for longer to a greater number of people there are a lot of advantages to the online presence of poetry and as Amy points out though we there are downsides of course yes and Amy's pointing out those are an only journals you can read and for those of you who write those are the journals you can send to many of them are wendysines like the one I mentioned had a dot org at the end and so yes I was very interested to hear you talk about the pleasure and the pain in poetry how much is known about the neurobiology of poetry particularly in the developing brain and in the deteriorating brain how much do we understand in this area young children people with neurodegenerative disease well we do know that I'm not very limited knowledge about this but I do know that play makes a difference both ends of that that it's very important for people to engage and in play not necessarily to worry about what they need to get done or and poetry provides that it is a it is a lifesaver for a lot of people who engage in that art I think well I want to give two personal anecdotes about that one is my publisher one of the fellow poets in the list had a book out that was a really fine book of poems but she was losing her mind and she was unable to function in any other way I don't know what this says about poets was a terrific book and the second experience I had was in a public school in Queens in April the Poetry Society asked some of you have done it I'm sure poets to go into the public schools and teach a few classes yeah so I was teaching sixth seventh and eighth grade which was a first and the sixth graders were incredibly good they had an instinctive sense of aesthetics which is what may survive as in my colleague who were nothing much else survived mentally they were wonderful they were moving my husband Roy came along with me he was struck by the same thing at the end of it the principal was debriefing and I said well I take it the sixth grade was your advanced class and she said no they were our special needs kids they were so far ahead of the other classes so you were probably the scientist and doctor I leave that to you to figure out what that means but I don't know if the study has been done about the effect on you know the synapses or someone's been hooked up to a bunch of sensors and then reads a poem and what parts of the brain might have there was a I can't I I didn't end up getting very far into reading and I put it off but there was a book called the the midnight disease written by a neurologist who is also a writer trying to evaluate the brain and and and she referenced more than just poets but that that perhaps that's the contains something of the answer I guess you get you could ask the question about creativity in general doesn't have to be just language I mean some people like decoding the painter I think he has Alzheimer's or some form of dementia and I think he went right on painting good paintings to the end they may have been affected by what happened to his brain but they would he was still a great painter things like that are interesting but I don't think we we really know I don't have anything to say about that question specifically although I suppose I should I'm a site or a psychiatrist but because there's not that much research I think done on that that particular topic but in general is interested in the comparing languages it's used in let's say prose where and we Patricia you touched on this a little bit at one point where you know the the meaning of the message is sort of intended and anyway the writer intends to intended they intend to make the meaning clear they don't always it sometimes spills out over you know they have messages they didn't intend to create but that's the point of prose and then in poetry it seems there's an interest in pushing past gushing past the limits of what the words are actually meaning on the surface there's that sort of pushing past I thought that's really interesting and it raises two questions one relates to this gentleman's question so play playing is a little bit of you know we know animals play right we know that they they are rehearsing physical programs so they learn how to hunt and move in a certain way but they do exceed whatever it's improvisational so they're not do not practicing like someone might practice playing the piano where you feel you need to meet especially with classical let's say where you're trying to meet the particular notes they're moving around but they're also exceeding they're being inventive and improvisational and that's what play involves the sort of pushing past whatever the sort of the the sheer formal aspect of what the brain seems to be doing so so that's that's one important thing but the other was to bring up the question about poetry is being changing over time is being an evolution of the constraints on poetry I thought that'd be an interesting topic that just touched on briefly because we talked about constraints like Twitter somebody letters can be allowed or another constraints whether it's professionalized capitalized whatever I that's another interesting way of looking at what's happened with poetry well I think poetry does require for a poet to write a poem certain restraints are required even if they're arbitrary so it's helpful when writing a summit to know what the rules are and one can decide when to follow them when not to the same would be true if I would assume if one's writing on Twitter one is a certain number of characters and that might actually inspire creativity but without some constraints we know how it's like Emily Dickinson gave gave themselves their own strange constraints and they invented their own rules and I think all of us do that to a certain degree and yes play I think the play starts very young I think I remember being just a child and loving the word hippopotamus and wanting to say it over and over or sewing machine which sometimes came out as mass mass wing shine or whatever but a lot of people start off as little gertrude steins before they they lose before they forget you know the wonder that that's that that is possible in the discovery of of language whereas poets are always trying to discover and yes and I do think constraints are at the center of everything that poets do in poetry does obviously in a traditional form somebody gives it to you but I think all of us and people I know I teach a workshop of actually awfully good poets and they what we're doing is setting ourselves our own constraints we're learning how to give ourselves our own assignments and set a constraint and it develops maybe as you write a poem but the constraint is what makes the poem I guess I wanted to add to that you have poets who are actually responding to these developments in terms of the new platforms that we're writing in poetry you've got Tommy Pico Morgan Parker I mentioned to you Morgan Parker has one book got Tommy Pico has two books out Tommy Pico's the first nation's Native American poet queer came out with a book called IRL which is an internet term so he's actually embracing the language that he experiences daily right in real time on the internet and that's actually changing how maybe not consciously but he's allowing it to enter into his poem he wrote a book called it's on it's based on the pastoral but it's also like an anti-pastoral because he uses a lot of language that you don't typically consider would be pastoral worthy you find on blogs you find on Twitter and he's very self-aware and he's writing this long poem on nature thinking about the password then go back 10 years ago you had Tom Lynn who teaches at a New Jersey he came up with a he's a conceptual poet he came up with the idea of poetry is boredom and boredom as actually being a pleasurable thing so he republished this to a called blip soap or one which is fantastic and when you're reading his work language is scattered all across the page like my army and he doesn't expect you to read it read it like treat it ambient he calls it ambience stylistics why can't you engage in poetry like you do music you can do three chores at once while listening to Chikovsky and still appreciate Chikovsky why can't it be the same thing for poetry so I understand if it's the poetry of boredom you're not even necessarily required to read the poem when you read it you can skip around or yeah well you're you are reading it but you've got three senses right you've got sight sound and then meaning yes so you can look at the words and if you look at his book he's playing around with typeface and uh but you don't have to read the whole poem it's impossible it's 300 pages long but you can read bits of it and then sip your coffee go water the plants take the dog out for a walk go back to it and appreciate it like an as an ambient experience but it's on the page right and so you know and that's I think a response to this oral and visual environment that we were finding ourselves immersed in 10 years ago before the success of YouTube right we're now like you have eight windows open on the internet and you're reading the times I've been talking to Anne Marie too there's something called visual poetry which is really a branch of concrete poetry where you arrange the words on the page to represent what the what your subject matters so I mean it actually has a long history but Anne Marie had an example of a poem about a dog shaped like a dog there's one older one by E Cummings called Grasshopper where the letters of the Grasshopper jump across the page so it might seem a little gimmicky but this goes all the way back to Robert Herrick and Herbert's Easter wings and so forth there's a long tradition of representing the words visually that said when there was this because you mentioned Malarmay when there was a discussion with you Malarmay and Edward Daga and Daga said you know I've been painting so much I would love to write poetry I have so many ideas and Malarmay said to him my dear Daga poems are not made out of ideas poems are made out of words so but then if you can arrange the words in pictures maybe poems are made out of images I mean images in two senses of the word gone yes I think of Borden as a kind of repressed anxiety so if it can be transformed into pleasure that's very interesting I have a question among the number of things I've been puzzling over in the course of your presentations one in particular and that is well wider and wider dissemination through more and more channels and venues engagement in social and political activity performance in a number of ways all and even intimacy all phenomena of the present moment and at the same time Patricia you were mentioned at least twice maybe three times the notion that only a handful of poems perhaps in any given era tend to last to endure and I'm wondering about the sort of dialectic between these two things because for example if you read as I tend to do a lot of poetry reviews you often hear the phrase so-and-so is the greatest poet writing in English at the present time or so-and-so is the greatest American poet of the end of the 20th century now if that's more than clear to move books at Farra styles of Norton in these reviews what what does that have to do with this more and more what seems like democratization of poetry huge diversity of poetry and then what does what's the meaning of the greatest poet writing in whatever language there's a clash there that I can't quite recognize you may well wonder about that I can listen to you I'm thinking if we just collected all the blurbs on the back story books but here's the real situation as opposed to even 20 years ago maybe you would ask a list of people interested in poetry will give me a list of the 10 most important poets writing now and most of the net there'd be a lot of overlap if you did that now with even 10 or 20 names there might be no overlap or maybe two or three names I don't I don't think there's exactly a contradiction in what you're saying I think it's again the winnowing effects of time I think reading the blurbs could skew that in your mind I think the best things reviewers can do I really think most poetry reviews first of all they're hardly any which is really sad and secondly the best of them don't really talk that much about poetry they'll give you enough of a selection from the book under review so you can judge for yourself what you think of this book but most of them don't as you probably realized they'll talk about it I don't know if that answers your question well the point is it is a subjective claim no matter how we look at it if someone says this is the greatest writer the greatest writer according to whom and in by according to what standards what is them and I think that's the place to start the harak who I mentioned you know has worked in visual forms he the reception of poets can be so odd he was slightly he was completely unknown during his time and then was discovered which is you know centuries ago and then was discovered in the 19th century so that's a really odd one so now people die and then they become really big after that like Emily Dickinson but here's someone who just lay underground for centuries I mean there's every kind of another who who like Oscar Wilde who did write some poems very popular in his time very popular afterwards it's very hard to know we can't know I think that it's important that you have you there are going to be those those that those who last through time but in the meantime we're living now and it's who we are interested in yes individuals and that's and that's important it's important to living life who we who we are interested in seeing and watching and in any reading everything who we are this is now and these are various you know any any used bookstore in a small town will make you sad because you'll become across books that were published they major publishing houses and you don't know who these people are so greatest can only be temporal really yes and if you know this if you know the future you don't have one anyway it's not yet the fact of every strong poet being the school of one but every reader is also a school of one and I think what Amy's saying is just look at what appeals to you yeah that's the only important thing the word greatest is a superlative which means it can only be one and if many many people are saying so-and-so is the greatest then it can only mean I like this word speaks to me yeah I think great should be a word there should be a list of little words you can't use in poetry views great would certainly be one of them it says absolutely nothing but you know what I think you touch you touch on the connection to capital in that statement right like you talk about the industry and you can't ignore thinking about great and greatest because every year we've got every month we have a new award that is going to somebody which requires strike qualifications and all that yeah we need to combine greatest scarcity American blurbs are especially hyperbolic actually if you would just compare American blurbs to Irish blurbs or English blurbs or others in the poetry speaking world it's pretty striking look at a list of who won Pulitzer prizes or something all the way back in fiction and poetry you'll see a lot of names that nobody knows and it's astounding right and that's a relatively new a prize the Pulitzer prize if there were something that that went back to the thousands of years we can only imagine what would be on that list so Robert Bridges did write at least one great poem heros terranos I feel that actually he knows he eros the one that begins heros tarantus yeah that's that's that's that's right that's right what just a great poem that's there's an example of a great poem whatever else he got what that's all you need to do you know I'm told I'm told that we need to wrap up I'm really glad to have to stop things it's good it means everyone's so interested thank you much to all of you thank you thank you thank you all the time thank you