 My name is Rob Penzer, I'm the Associate Director of the Helix Center. I just have a few announcements. Next Saturday, March 7th, we have Curiosity in conjunction with the publication of the eponymous book by Alberto Mangoyle with psychiatrist Paul Browd, physicist Edgar Chueery, poet Marie Howe, writer's Siri Hustved and of course Alberto Mangoyle himself. On April 18th, we have a John Templeton Foundation roundtable, The Mind of a Child, followed by April 25th, another Templeton Foundation roundtable, The Changing Nature of Free Will. On May 2nd, we'll be discussing trauma and its after-effects. On May 9th, we'll have a program of experimental films and make note that there is a helix center benefit coming up on May 8th at the Lotus Club and announcements will be forthcoming. Also watch your emails and please check on our website, helixcenter.org. Please like us on Facebook and like us anyway and follow us on Twitter. And now to today's program. And please, yes, thanks Ed. Please make sure that if you did receive one of the evaluations for today's program that you fill it out and hand it back to someone from the helix center. We depend on your feedback greatly for the fulfillment of our Templeton grant. So I'm going to introduce today's participants and as I say your name if you can just raise your hand so the audience will identify you. David Chalmers, professor of philosophy and co-director of the Center for Mind, Brain and Consciousness at New York University is best known for his work on consciousness, especially for his formulation of the hard problem of consciousness and his arguments against materialism. His 1996 book, The Conscious Mind in Search of a Fundamental Theory, was successful with both popular and academic audiences. He's been a leader in the interdisciplinary science of consciousness and also works on issues about language, metaphysics and artificial intelligence. His most recent book, Constructing the World, was published in 2012 and attempts to build a model of the world from a few primitive concepts. Carl Friston, professor at the Institute of Neurology University College London, is a theoretical neuroscientist and authority on brain imaging. The inventor of a major body of statistical techniques for analyzing functional neuroimaging and other mathematical contributions. He currently works on models of functional integration in the human brain and the principles that underline neuronal interactions with his main contribution to theoretical neurobiology being the free energy principle for action and perception. Among his awards and honors, he has been the recipient of the first Young Investigators Award in Human Brain Mapping, electionist fellow of the Royal Society, and recipient of the Weldon Memorial Prize in Medal in 2013 for contributions to mathematical biology. Pete Hutt has been professor of astrophysics at the Institute for Advanced Studies since 1985, where he is currently the head of the Program for Interdisciplinary Studies. His research and interests in compass computational astrophysics, interdisciplinary explorations of cognitive science and philosophy of science, the origins of life on Earth as well as elsewhere in the universe for which he is a foreign principal investigator at the Earth Life Institute, Science Institute at the Tokyo Institute of Technology. The author of more than 200 publications he was honored in 2004 when a main belt asteroid was named 1703-1 Pete Hutt by the International Astronomical Union's Committee on Small Body Nomenclature. Gabriel Bennett Jackson is assistant professor of philosophy at Stony Brook University. After receiving her PhD in philosophy from Harvard in 2011, she was the Andrew Mellon Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Toronto's Jackman Humanities Institute and a visitor at the Institute for Advanced Study at their School of Social Sciences. She's interested in scientifically informed approaches to the study of the mind, and her recent work includes articles, Skillful Action in Peripersonal Space and Neuro Philosophy and its Discontents. Ken Paller, professor of psychology and director of the training program in the Neuroscience of Human Cognition at Northwestern University, is cognitive neuroscientist whose recent research includes sleep's role in memory and memory dysfunction, sensory processing during sleep and learning, the neuro substrates of conscious memory experiences and memory and intuition. A fellow of both the Mind and Life Institute and the Association for Psychological Science and journal editor at Neuropsychologia, he is the recipient of multiple research grants including the NSF and NIH and the Senator Mark Hatfield Award from the Alzheimer's Association. Nicholas Schiff is Gerald Katz, professor of neurology and neuroscience as well as director of the Laboratory for Cognitive Neuro-Modulation at Weill Cornell Medical College. His research focuses on recovery of consciousness following brain injuries. He and his research group have contributed several landmark advances including the first demonstrations of brain structural alterations occurring in the setting of very late recovery from severe brain injury. He received the 2007 research award for innovation in neuroscience from the Society for Neuroscience for his research on arousal regulation and deep brain's electrical stimulation demonstrating that long lasting severe cognitive disability may be influenced by electrical stimulation of the human central thalamus and now to our roundtable. I thought I'd get you started by saying that two weeks ago we showed the movie Particle Fever here and the documentary and then we had a roundtable afterwards and as you know that was about detecting the Higgs boson. So my question to you is if we can detect Higgs boson why are we having so much trouble with consciousness? Sure. I guess there's a lot of things that make consciousness distinctive and difficult. This is supposed to be objective but consciousness is this quintessentially subjective phenomenon. It's defined as subjective experience, this subjective experience of the mind and of the world. We want to explain everything in terms of objective mechanisms. That's what we do in science and there seems to be this potential gap in the explanation between the level of objective mechanisms, how one thing causes another thing and this billiard ball causation in the universe and consciousness. How is it that this giant network of neurons we have in the head objectively hooked up bring about consciousness? Now this doesn't mean you can't do science on it. One of the wonderful things that's happened in the last 20 or years now has been an exploding science of consciousness. The neuroscientists have been studying it making all kinds of progress on finding the bits of the brain that go along with bits of consciousness. But it is for now a science of correlation. We know that some bits of the brain go along with some bits of consciousness. We're still working on the part which is about explanation and I think it's these issues about explanation that really make the study of consciousness difficult. I'll take a stab at following that up. I think the evolution and the maturity of theory in physical science is just so vastly beyond what it is in biological science to give you an idea of what consciousness, what the rules of the game might be for causal creation of consciousness in a central nervous system. And the measurements that we have that we can link correlationally are few and far between so we're just very far behind the curve of anything like what got you to a Higgs boson, a theory predicting a particular phenomena in the physical structure of the brain that's linked to consciousness. It's very hard actually to know if somebody can't show you any response whether they're conscious. That's a large operational part of what we do at the interface of clinical medicine and research to try to understand retained consciousness in a structurally injured brain because we don't have rules that say, okay, you know, if you have these parts of the brain in there and these states, you definitely have consciousness. Another problem with trying to explain consciousness is that sort of like other phenomenon science, when you observe them, you don't necessarily expect them to change fundamentally upon observation but the nature of consciousness is that the observer in the observed are the same thing. What it is to have a conscious mind is to be an observer, to have a point of view. And so, I mean, the physicists are familiar with this phenomenon. You know, if you're looking at a conscious state or a conscious process, in virtue of looking at it, have you artificially changed the thing, the very thing you're supposed to be explaining? And so how do you get behind being the observer in focus on the real phenomenon as it's happening? So I'd also agree with these reasons for why this is a difficult problem to try to understand consciousness. But I think it's nice that David came up with this catchphrase of the hard problem of consciousness because note that he didn't decide to talk about the impossible problem of consciousness. He didn't say it was that difficult as to be impossible. There is a science of consciousness and that's moving forward as he mentioned and will continue to move forward. So we admit to it being a difficult problem, but I'm not sure if we think it's impossible. That's the spirit. Yeah? Was this going to follow up on the observer aspect? I mean, it may be that that aspect of the problem is the thing that makes it hard. I mean, that's the question, question-wise, it's so hard. If you follow Richard Feynman that if I want to understand something, I have to be able to model it. What you're asking of an understanding of consciousness is the ability to model myself. And I think there's something fundamentally impossible about a system that can model itself because it has to represent itself. And so if it does that, it has to represent that representation and that infinitum. So there may be something deeply problematic and deeply hard about the brain modeling itself which is not an aspect of modeling the Higgs boson. It's very interesting for me to hear your example of the Higgs boson. Since about 40 years ago, I started my graduate studies, it's hard to imagine 40 years, but what I did was to compute, to make computations of the Higgs boson. And I had many different interests. It was hard to choose, so I tried to do a double PhD in particle physics in astronomy, the very largest and the very smallest because they are the simplest. This scale is the most difficult to understand. And by the time I got my PhD, I got a feeling that it might take a while for the Higgs boson to be discovered. So I decided to become a astrophysicist rather than a Higgs boson specialist. And I'm glad I did because most of my career, I would have to turtle my thumbs. What you said about physics, so being so different from other brain studies, I think there are three big problems in all of science, the three biggest problems. Where does matter come from? Where does life come from? Where does consciousness come from? And the where is really a why question. Why is there a matter? Why is there a life? Why is there a consciousness? If you would have nothing at all, you would never expect that to be something. Forget about who is asking the questions but in principle. So big surprise, there is something at all. And then if you have physics and chemistry, who would have guessed a living cell, so complicated, big surprise, and giving simple life, who would have guessed consciousness? So the three questions can also be formulated. Why is there a matter? Why is there life? Why is there the ability to ask? Why is there life? Why is there consciousness? And that is that feedback loop. But Dave, you think there are some hard problems that can't be solved. So you think there is an impossible problem with consciousness? Oh, I think we have a scientific theory of consciousness and I've been very invested in the movement to work towards such a science. I think some theories will be good theories and some theories will be bad theories. So for example, some people out there would like to just reduce consciousness to a process in the brain and say, oh, there is to consciousness is some neurophysiological process and we can give a complete explanation of consciousness in terms of a bunch of neural firings in the brain. I think that kind of theory, although it's a great thing to aim for, but I think that kind of theory isn't going to work. Any explanation that's wholly in terms of the neurophysiology of the brain is basically going to explain a bunch of the things we do, you know, ability to get around in the world and to respond and so on. But it's always going to leave out the subjective experience. So I've argued that we need a different kind of theory when that takes consciousness as something fundamental in the world and connects it to all of these other things. But I would still see that as a solution to the hard problem. The hard problem is explaining how is it that consciousness arises from the processes in the brain. It's just I think you need, you know, you need to, the standard methods we've developed so far in neuroscience and they go so far and I think a lot of people agree we need new methods. The question is what are those new methods and new theories? What are those new methods? Why would you need new theories? Why not just figure out the way, I mean you know what brings about consciousness, don't you? You said firing of millions or billions of neurons. So you know what brings it about. Coffee. Coffee. Yes. But how does coffee bring about consciousness? I don't think that we do know that. I think what we have are very good understandings of state correlations and brain state and likelihood of consciousness. And that's better than nothing. And it gives us a clue about what aspects of neuronal function are more or less important to wafer consciousness for example. And that's I think probably where our best correlational data are right now. But it's actually not good enough for you to just get the brain data and to make a reasonable or fiducial inference about whether somebody actually is conscious. You can make a pretty good risk assessment I think and an increasingly good risk assessment and that's different. If you wanted to do this partition of problem. If there was a problem of how does consciousness arise from neuronal processes, that presumably is easier than the reverse question is how does consciousness affect or influence or nuance neural processing. Absolutely. So your job in terms of detecting conscious level I think is a testament to the fact that there's an enormous amount of progress made in mapping from the biophysics to the conscious level. I thought the deeper problem is getting back again. But I think quite frankly it's a very sort of humbling job because you're often left with a very wide variance of uncertainty. And as you say I mean once you get to the idea that consciousness might have some emerging effects like a dynamic element that on top of the brain then has causal effect on the structure. We don't have a model that gets us even close to those sorts of questions yet. So I mean from my point of view but that's maybe a limited understanding. But do you see that margin of uncertainty decreasing through the years? Yeah no I mean I think we're making a lot of progress. It's just that we're not anywhere near a standard model which would produce something like a prediction about something from theory that we might then go measure in the brain and say aha this model is right and that's sort of the amazing thing about the big suppose I think. But Dave is making the assumption that no physiological theory will ever be. He's sufficient he prefers a theory with consciousness as a primitive which is a fine alternative for theory but your assumption that a neurophysiological theory is going to come up short is really based on our current understanding of consciousness. And you're projecting about future theories of consciousness that haven't been presented yet. So how do we. Well one thing why should the rest of us I don't know if the rest of us are convinced but why should the rest of us be convinced that none of those future theories are going to provide what you say you don't think is possible. Well I think it depends I mean different people are going to get off the bus at different points. First of all is to make a point about current theories I mean is what current theories gives us basically of a level of correlation. I mean what we are getting is this connection from this mapping I think as Kyle was putting it from neuro processes to consciousness and it's slow and slow progress two steps forward and one step back but we're getting somewhere in the mapping but it's still of a level of you know of mappings or correlations there's nothing analogous say to what you got Pete mentioned the case of life so let's take one central element to the explanation of life the explanation of the genetic processes in terms of DNA. What's done Craig didn't do was we discovered that whenever there's life there's DNA look at this amazing correlation rather they found a mechanism potential mechanism at least in the structure of the DNA molecule and they told you know at the beginnings of a potential story about how this could explain the things that we want the gene to explain like the transmission of characteristics from one generation to the next. It's of nothing like that kind of story right now in the neuroscience of consciousness even though we've got we're developing some nice correlations and then the question is why is that is it just is it just something about the structure of our current theories or is it something about the character of what you get from these neurobiological explanations I think the more you look at it the more it starts to look as if it's not just something about the contingent character of the neurobiological theories we've caught with so far it's rather something about their mechanistic nature it's all about you know you've got a bunch of objective mechanisms which are here performing certain functions doing certain things but you can always raise the further question why does all that give you subjective experience why should it be why should it feel like something from the inside so either it looks like either what you've got to do is add some ingredient to that explanation to put some extra thing in the base or the alternative and it's a important alternative is to somehow deflate the phenomenon of consciousness either say neurobiology is something more than we thought it was or consciousness is something less something less than we thought it was some people have tried to take that move somebody like Daniel Dennett for example has said so much of consciousness is an illusion my view is that if you want to try and explain consciousness wholly in terms of these objective mechanisms in the brain you may have to deflate consciousness to some considerable extent. But it seems still that the jump you're taking is from our current the current shortcomings of theories of consciousness to project that then all future theories have that same short coming. I think certain time and and and not like there's a million different theories of consciousness and some of them are I'm totally on board with the question is reductionist theories of consciousness in terms of neuroscience the question is what resources does neuroscience give you and the reduction of the explanatory base in neuroscience the stuff we explain everything in terms of is a bunch of mechanisms which come down to certain structures playing certain dynamical roles which is fantastic for explaining how it is that the brain does certain things produces certain behaviors and certain responses but for any explanation of that kind you can always ask the further question why does all this objective functioning give you consciousness. So any theory my view is any theory caused purely in terms of objective structure and function we'll leave that gap maybe there are other kinds of theories. Is there a deepest intuition about what would what would resist deflation from your point of view is there you know what aspect of subjectivity do you see hardest to fit in principle against the kind of models that exist or could evolve from those that exist. I would say you know it's the fact that it feels like something from the inside I mean there's this classic philosophical thought experiment of a Mary the scientist in a black and white room who knows everything about color processes in the brain and about the wavelengths that bring them about and about the the retinal and the neurophysiological responses and about the words we associate with these things but she is herself colorblind maybe she grew up in a black and white room so she knows all about the brain processes associated with seeing red which is never had the experience of seeing red and it looks like okay she knows all the brain stuff but she doesn't know the central thing about seeing red and then what it's like from the inside that's the subjective experience. So so so imagine a fast forward of existing measurements and theories where you have and take a fanciful example of an MRI that can map the column space of the color area and before or something like that and you look and you see that people who can resolve certain collections of perceptions that include one that she doesn't have partition activity and to five dimensions or something and she does it in four and then you have some manipulation where she suddenly partitions it into five and tells you aha now I see this. So is an explanation like that what's an identification of something you might measure with the idea that there's a quality associated with it not count as a at least a possible explanation not an explanation but enough of enough of a model to kind of say well maybe this is enough. I agree it's a model and I agree there's a kind of explanation you get from this kind of work of building up it's basically building up systematic correlations between these things you know the brain processes and the experiences such that for example one could make some predictions if somebody has a certain novel kind of brain process here David Hume talked about the missing shade of blue the one he had never experienced. So maybe we could predict that if you had a certain neurophysiological process there in between the other shades of blue then you'd get that experience. All of the missing shade of blue that's predictive that is to a certain extent explanatory but what it's not is a full reductive explanation of the experience. One example that does exist that sort of this reminds me of right away is the difference between natural naturally deaf signers and people who have acquired deafness and signing and the use of physical space and I think it's Ursula Luge or somebody who's done a lot of work on this and they find that the auditory cortex takes over visual functions and there's a fluency difference and so people who are natural signers will know if somebody's truly fluent because of the way they use space in front of them in their hands and place things and there's a whole visual motor component to their language effectively that's not auditory and there's a neural representation that's novel. So you know, I mean that's proof that this is all in the brain or that this is an argument against the philosophical standpoint but there are these kinds of things like this and they give us a sense that the identifications get larger. This is what we're getting from the science of consciousness over the last 20 years. A beautiful set of isomorphisms from processes in consciousness to psychological processes, some computational processes and some gradually developing some brain level processes. There's nothing here I think that answers the fundamental question why does all that brain stuff give you consciousness in the first place rather this science takes the existence of consciousness for granted as a kind of datum. It's given that we have it, what does it correlate with and we're getting a very nice science from that but that's why people always want to put it as if by opposing the reduction of this explanation of consciousness you're opposing science completely but no in fact the science has been tremendously productive, it's been predictive and some of it's even becoming useful in treating patients in clinical settings where we've taken stuff we know about the correlates of consciousness and put it to practical purposes but it does leave the fundamental philosophical question open. I should say I'm curious, we can focus all day on the things that make consciousness difficult but we've got people here who are speaking in an optimistic tone of voice about the wonderful theories that might be just around the corners. I'm curious to hear what some people think are the other places where they see we're actually likely to be making progress over the next 10, 20, 30 years and what kind of theories might be the ones that will have some promise. Gabrielle, do you? I'm still sort of hung up on this sort of question of what the it is when you say we can explain all the, we can find out more and more about the brain processes and the complex dynamic systems that are implemented in the brain but we still haven't explained consciousness. I'm just sort of interested in what we think we're trying to explain. Is it, so we're all sitting in this room and there's this background hum of the air coming into the room and there's this kind of dispersed consciousness that maybe we're aware of that and then there's this sort of focused consciousness that brought your attention to the sound of the air coming into the room so surely we're conscious of that because I've now brought your attention to it but that's attentional consciousness which is different than dispersed consciousness that might be just happening in the background and I'm sort of curious actually to ask the scientists too, so when you're sitting in the lab and you're devising an experiment about memory or what we're experiencing when we're asleep in dreaming states, how do you know that we're studying a conscious state unless there's someone reporting on it saying that I'm conscious of this thing. Of course once they've reported on it then you're talking about a particular kind of consciousness. The consciousness that requires access, attention. So what is the clever workaround that the scientists here are using to sort of get at that problem? Yeah, I think we don't have a workaround for understanding awareness during sleep. Aside from maybe lucid dreaming we know very little about that and I think maybe if we get somewhere it will be with some brain measures that have a type correlation but we're not there yet but back to the other idea of memory I think one of the perhaps answers to your point is in a number of fields in my field in memory research one of the approaches is to contrast different types of memory and so we have a widely agreed upon contrast between implicit memory and explicit memory and so we understand the brain mechanisms of these types of memory and how they differ from each other and the interesting part of that is that with explicit memory you can do mental time travel and you can relive a past event you can have a conscious experience of something from the past with implicit memory you don't have that. Now both types of memory are very complex so we can look in the brain and ask well what's happening to allow those memory and phenomena to go forward and then how do they differ? What fundamental differences are there between those two types? So that's again not a solution it's not the answer but it's one of the avenues of which there are many to try to pinpoint the essential features that are happening in the brain and then my thought is as we pursue that we might have some new ideas about what it is that's special about the aware memories compared to the unaware memories is one example. Can you tell us a few questions about the progress that you've been talking about? I think the progress will come from posing the problem. I mean you asked a very good question you gave an excellent answer. I wonder whether just looking at the brain as a scientist might hold the clue to the hardness of it. So you've been talking about inferring through correlations through statistical regularities and mappings that this is a conscious brain that's making its own own sensory input but if it is the case that the brain is a scientist in the game of trying to infer the causes of the sensory information then we come back to this fundamental problem. The brain is actually trying to make inferences about itself and that's not the same as you try to infer whether this subject is conscious or not or whether somebody is having some perceptual adventure in a dream during sleep or trying to impute whether they are conscious when they're not allowed to verbally report. So all of these issues I think do detract from the fundamental thing it's my inference and how do I infer that I am making an inference when the machinery I'm using to do it is the thing that's making the inference means I can sit on top of it. How about if we make a deal all model you, new model range? They would have to merge or ego boundaries and they will be all be happy with it. Because in fact our modeling is a group. The science endeavors a group process it's not each of us on our own. Can I ask what you say about changing understanding of existing notions? It is very much true in my field as a physicist that our understanding of matter over the last 200 years has changed enormously. So if people tell me I'm a materialist I ask them well do you mean like in 1800 or 1905 or 1925 or maybe you are a string theorist do you see the world in terms of strings? I mean the same word matter has evolved from something inert and something objectively existing to something which you can only probe by taking a chance a stance of how you measure it and something which on a smaller scale can even have completely different properties maybe even live in a different number of dimensions. So it may very well be that gradually over time our understanding of the brain mind connection will also move on and what you sometimes call panpsychism that everything has a conscious component. The first time we hear that we think about the physics world and then within the physics world some sort of spooky fluid field or medium whatever which is in consciousness but that would be as strange as learning relativity theory and saying there is matter and there is energy and somehow the two interpenetrate each other it's so mysterious. Actually there is one thing and sometimes it condenses into matter and sometimes it shows itself as energy and it's not two different things which interpenetrate or interact with each other. The way William James said it I really like about matter and mind he said if two lines intersect there is one point where they cross not two different points there is one point lying on two lines. So mind and matter I can look at this as a physical object but this is also an experience in my mind that he experienced a bottle and physical bottle for me that are not two bottles which somehow have to be pushed together it's the intersection of both. I use the word coupling makes a mindful of that nice example about an understanding of DNA and how it causes us to be here as phenotypes and how good phenotypes propagate through their genes in that there is a circular causality which does I think bridge different levels of explanation. So the difference between the physical bottle and your inference that that is a bottle causing the sensations caused by physical bottles that's one example of closing that circular causality that I think does bridge the levels. So I think the deflationary expressions are unsatisfactory because they deny the challenge of coupling the levels of explanation into experiences and beliefs which basically means that neuroscience has to have a formal machinery to explain quantify and write down beliefs. It's as simple as that and once you've done that you can then work out how neuronal firing causes beliefs and then you can work out how beliefs change neural firing. In this case to your state example which is a very it's not a theoretical example for me it's an example that kind of enlarges in many of the cases that we see because almost all of them are like your neuroscientists in a room when they're hard if there's no output and you start to have correlations that get you close to states that look like states when that person doesn't have a motor problem they can talk to you and do lots of things but then you have this kind of limited set of measurements to try and you might not get a response that's expected. In other words they seem to have the right parts of the brain they should be able to if they were just awake and conscious and in the state that you were I were in and do a few things that you could measure and reliably get the result and you don't. So then is it is at their point of view are they in a lucid dreaming like state are they in some other you know altered consciousness because we don't have a model that says you know you get represent representational stuff with subjectivity when all this happens in the brain and if you're missing this aspect of it you kind of don't or actually it's as if you know you're there but you're not really aware so you're not taking in the sensory information and processing it the way you would be if you were kind of admitting to the world around you being real. I mean they're just an endless number of variations on it that you could sit there and kind of wonder is that what I'm looking at. I am assuming that you can in your lab say this person is conscious this person is comatose and this person is dead. Well okay let's start with the last two. Okay okay because no because I think you know that's that's meaningful so we know when someone's dead okay and that's actually and that's the most unambiguous and not present with uncertainty and determination that we can make given all of our available tools and so the only time that that becomes an issue of uncertainty is that sometimes we're relying on a subset of those tools because it's not practical to make every possible measurement to determine that every person dead person is dead okay but it is it is possible to unambiguously unequivocally figure out if somebody is dead that we understand. Coma is also a state that has not too much ambiguity somebody who's comatose with the right reasons to be comatose in terms of medical problems the correlational data that goes along with being in a deep coma doesn't have a lot of variation doesn't have a lot of variance and I would actually say that we shouldn't have a problem identifying with somebody's in a coma but that's the best that you know this is this is the left hand if we put it on a linear scale that's the extreme left and the extreme right would be full consciousness and when you move from coma the next level up would be people who appear to be comatose in terms of not responding to you in any way but for periods of time their eyes open their eyes closed that's that's sort of definitionally with vegetative status now vegetative state should be defined or identified by a whole biological context in which the brain is very severely injured and that eye opening and eye closure is just reflecting a remnant of arousal the brain stem and activity above the brain stem not being present but then things get more complicated because that measurement isn't always that that assessment isn't always followed up with measurements that would verify that underlying model and you hear stories about people who are diagnosed as vegetative with high level cognition and that we just had a whole conference on this about six months ago that's just a contradiction and just a mistake and those are patients who are misdiagnosed as vegetative and there should be lots of correlational data that tell you that that's probably bad as an assumption and working that out as a field and I think everybody's kind of getting to that point but then the next level up is that you start to show some sign of consciousness you may give a thumbs up you may give some very limited response but you can't communicate so you can't go and say well what's inside of this person's subjective response and actually what's their status of consciousness compared to you and me when we can tell you about it and give you metaphors and speak in sentences about it and then the grading as you go up gets more complicated in their elements of memory or orientation or self-awareness and things like that that don't come back and then finally you get into a range of normative conscious experience which is really pretty wide because once you get to be near normal then things are highly multivariate so it's actually the answer is no we can't do that. You cannot detect what changes in the brain as the person from the vegetative state moves towards the conscious. No that I didn't say. No that's why I'm asking. That's different. You can in a coarse grain of fashion do that and increasingly well and that's the engine underneath our science. So you can draw a rough line. You can draw a rough line with some coarse graded points on the grid and that's how this game is getting played and it's increasingly getting more predictive. I think it's a great it's moving towards a great science of the correlations between what brain areas, what brain criteria there are for being conscious and for not being conscious so that even as a science of correlations I think it has to be said it's fairly primitive in some respects. At the moment we've got some clear cases where we think okay there's very good reasons for thinking these people are conscious and we know the beginning to know something about the brain processes that go along with that. As you move away from the clear cases it gets very difficult you know there are cases where people aren't responding and I always want to ask the question well how do you know there's not some residual consciousness there that's not showing up in their actions and their responses. Just a question of what instrument you are producing to detect and if you could have instruments that detect those differences then that would be interesting. This would all be so much easier if we had the famous consciousness meter. Just wave this instrument at Niko's head and get a read out of his consciousness up on the screen. It could be from instruments that detect the activity of the brain that you say is now detectable. I can tell you that in practice and this is going to be reduced to an operational set of problems and I can think of really great cases. The boundary question that you're posing is what about minimally conscious versus vegetative. Where you know if you have somebody who has some level of brain activity or some very low level response you measure when is it conscious versus when is it really like coma. The answer is we don't know how to do that and there's some very interesting stuff when you start trying to make sense of some of the things you might measure or observe and correlate with neuronal function but we don't have a model that says this kind of brain activity creates a representational, subjective internal state and you can make a few probes at it and say well it at least has this content. There's nothing like that. I have a question about this. If you find somebody who can have a minimal reaction like a yes or no then in principle you would think it can take a very long time but in principle you could can the sentence out of the person by asking is it A, is it B or whatever in a tree. Yes, you're right in the game and so we have examples on every edge of that. We have patients who we first detect that they can follow a command to move their eye. One woman we saw after two years even her family had never seen any response. Once that was discovered then a huge effort was made to connect with her and she can inconsistently communicate but she doesn't yet have any way with existing technology to turn that into a successful communication system. So we believe she's conscious when there are windows of time when she's aware enough that she can use that eye. We know that that state is one in which she has awareness and some of the problems of memory and things like that that she may have because she's injured medial temporal structures can kind of be suggested by things she does answer right and things she doesn't answer right. We have other examples of patients who have these very narrow communication channels where you start to get a flavor for it. But then we have patients who have every correlation in fact examples where their brains look better than all these patients where we have absolutely nothing. Now that, there's like the ultimate urgency to kind of figure this out because some of these people are very young and they're otherwise healthy. Their problem is just brain injury. But yeah, so we see that and then we have examples where people transitioned. So we had one man who came to us who all but one person who saw them thought they were conscious but the one person who figured out they were conscious worked out a head movement system so that they could spell very slowly out and it was clear that they were conscious and then they were given various tools and they harnessed them over time. Now that patient sent us emails and came back after five years and the great email saying I'm looking forward to coming so I can show you what I can do now. And you know and over time had evolved a much more full and complete communication system so that we could see through his writing, through the book he was writing his interest. He wanted to go to cooking school. You know the fullness of his consciousness was there and actually his brain was more structurally injured than the other five people like this that we've been following. So you know it's true but it's not trivial. So is it possible that you've got this case of someone who only responds by a head movement or maybe by blinking their eyes or something. That's the only way they can express their consciousness. This raises the question well couldn't there be someone who didn't have the ability to make the head movement. And to pick their eyes but nonetheless. And so we have full questions that we've studied who I worry very much about that and we think the data give us the probability that that's the way they are. But you know we don't have the tools to say that it is the way they are. Do you think they're probably conscious? Yeah absolutely and the question is what do we do about it. But know that you can measure their brains you can ask them to use the way of thinking to use the blood flow in the brain effectively instead of the head movement. So this is where this gets into the heart, the absolute core of the issue here. Measurement isn't that easy. It's not often those measurements aren't super reliable even in normals. But once you start introducing issues of brain injury state variations because of brain injury. So that they may have the material there to do a mental imagery response but their arousal function or their level of their quality of consciousness over their wakeful periods of time varies dramatically. You start getting into complexities about not having a reliable model that says this is what has to happen this is the state it has to be and it has to be held constant in this way and you know and this is how you're going to get reliable communication. So you know again these are more practical issues but they make it then hard when you don't have the communication to make an assessment of where they are subjectively because again it's an assessment of what's their subjective state that needs some kind of readout from them to you to make an estimate of it. And your practical problem is actually twofold because you want to know what their current state of awareness is and you want to know what the future holds. Well also how to move them so that they can get better and become part of the world or interactive with the world. They're part of the world but to be barbed the community. That's right and so that's exactly why I think we're pretty close to where the predictive models tell us what we can do because we would have a consequence if they were better. So what you're saying now sounds like that depending on from patient to patient even what could be a marker for activity in the brain is different and this actually reminds me of another thing that William James says when he talks about consciousness he says something like I'm going to misquote total pluralism absolute insularity and of course he's talking about how consciousness is personal and for every person in the room there's a different consciousness but also it sounds like even scientifically for every brain injured patient that comes in there's a different potentially different measure that you're going to need to figure out whether these patients are aware. In the heart of modern medicine this is the ultimate personalized medicine. Yeah. But that doesn't mean there won't be a general model but not brain works. And in all these different cases if there's for every different possible case there's a different mechanism that you're looking at then in the normal case. Well, but this is I mean that's a theory with a lot of disjuncts. Right now but I mean at some point there should be some simplicity. Right. Right. Like there's brains got parts and they're in the right state and we could be clever about you know working around brain lesions and the rest of it but you know it is it does come down to the biology of it so something like coma you know things are very uniform and how the brain activity appears everywhere. And once you start getting minimal signs of consciousness then things get much more complex and they start looking a lot like normal depending on which you know measure you're looking at and then it's the same problem like what are the correlations that are meaningful. Consciousness seems very like almost like leaky or something like it sort of goes like it can sort of go to like one kind of process and that's going to be the one that's correlated with consciousness or it can leak into some other area depending on what person. Well, this is why I like to have a model that said you know if you have a subjective state that has you know that's a correlate with this belief or that I'm dreaming versus I believe I'm in the world that you know they're both conscious but what's the what's the what's the measure that's associated with it. We just don't have that. The pluralism here is more about the way that you access or you infer that there is some inference going on. Right. I get the impression that any modality will do whether it's a pill or a response or a symptom of a thing as long as there's some embodied expression of it which can be very different and very individual but implicitly that underneath you think that there is something canonical about the conscious brain you need to demonstrate. Can we map to your question though? If you could never demonstrate it would you say that that person was no longer consciousness conscious? Well, okay. So I mean let's go canonical right. So it's the stuff that the brain is made of is very stereotyped right. So you know we have certain I mean there's complexity on complexity but we think of consciousness is in the corticothlamic system right and corticothlamic system has conservation of motifs. I mean the cells are different they have all sorts of interesting differences but you know if we had a whole hemisphere we had these rules from clinical neurology and it's only an issue when it's only an issue when the motor system is out of the game right because if the motor system is in the game and we have you know that's there's some fine print there if I can hear my colleagues jumping up is it inside the motor system in terms of will to action and other things there might be things that stop you from showing conscious behaviors even though you have a connection to your skeletal muscle system. But let's just say that you know the issue is you know is this person in a conscious brain stable but there are some correlations we have if you have one hemisphere you can be conscious and if you had enough thalmicortical cells and they were in the right state you know we kind of think that you should be conscious and if you're not then then it's just because there's something we don't understand. So you're saying that I mean it doesn't have to be the strident muscle system it could be your autonomic system. Sure I could show a cardiac cellaration or a blush. So the key thing is acting on the world part of being embodied it's somehow I have to change the world in order to express my consciousness or not on that. Yeah practically speaking but are you saying I mean I guess it's a little bit like the question can you be a scientist if you can never do an experiment. You can certainly have scientific aspirations and you can certainly have glorious ideas about all the data other scientists are generating but are you truly a scientist if for the rest of your life you can never acquire any more data. Actually that reminds me of my profession of as a physicist the latest cosmology theories have not one universe but a multiverse multiple universes and the best theories we have predicted that we know that we cannot check it. So is that empirical science? No is it science? Well it's a consequence of empirical sciences but it's a similar gray area. Sounds like the situation you're in that. That's right it's actually not that different. Right I mean it's because we don't even have the theory that predicts these things we just have the observations that you know there are different states that look like they could be supporting consciousness. So people are trying to come up with unified models of consciousness. One of the one of the interesting things that's happened recently is people trying to develop systematic quantitative theories of consciousness that might have some application to these cases. There's this Giulio Tiononi's integrated information theory where he basically says consciousness goes along with the amount of information that's being integrated in the brain or in some other process and he measures this with a quantity he calls phi. So you have a lot of phi you've got a lot of consciousness you've got less phi you've got less consciousness and actually the conference we had one of the more interesting presentations with someone trying to apply that to the case of people diagnosed with vegetative state and related conditions. I mean this thing phi is actually very hard to measure in the brain but people find surrogates for it that might at least approximate it. Protebational complexity. And so one of the things that evolved there was that it's very very good at the dichotomization of not conscious and conscious. So it helps you find people who are vegetative proxies that do the Marchal and that's how many of these work. So it's very nice to separate people who are in coma, anesthetic coma or vegetative state from wakefulness but once you start getting into these conditions of minimally conscious, confusional behavior on your way up to normative conscious behavior, there's no fine line and there's no separation. So that it doesn't mean there aren't other measures and there isn't a model but it's just that that's where we're lacking, we're lacking something that gives us an insight into the dynamics that are really informative about qualitative subjective consciousness. And even within these models, nobody knows, you get this number out of it, but phi could be one or ten or a hundred or a thousand. Nobody knows which where on this line corresponds to no consciousness. I mean I think to know in his own view is that even if there's a tiny amount of information integrating, there's a tiny amount of consciousness but that's in a way philosophical speculation is a counter- Yeah that would be, that would convince me. Was this any different than before you knew that cirrhosis of the liver caused ichters? And so you saw yellow people and you didn't know why they were yellow but you knew they were yellow. Then you discovered that it was because the liver was sick. So why is the manifestation of the organs so different and so difficult? It's the number of times you said we don't have the tools, we don't have the tools. Is it just a question of tools? Well the tools and the theory and they go together I think. I mean you can invent all sorts of models which I think Taunonia has one of them. But and I'm sure in the old days people invented various theories by someone was yellow so there were many models. But eventually you discovered why in fact they were yellow and then you even refined that further and further and further to the chemical level. So why is that kind of thinking not applicable to the issue of consciousness? Well it could be that it is and we're just not clever enough to see how existing tools and models could be used to kind of account for it. But I think it's qualitatively distinct. So if you had other people turning other diseases turning people other colors and there were different substances which there are and I can't remember the history of where it still pictures came in with all that. But the I think the feeling is and I think what you're hearing is that none of the models none of the measurement tools even in principle give a satisfying flavor that they could give you an account of how there's a subjective internally representational state occurring with neural activity of any pattern. One answer though. I mean you spoke about that I'm a cortical interaction so my guess is you do actually have an understanding of the functional anatomy of consciousness you know just being a bit modest. Of course. I think the difference between jawless and the liver is that there is it's an easy problem because you know you don't have to explain how being yellow causes liver disease. I think that there's a much deeper issue when it comes to this levels of description and the circular causality. So what the question is for the brain that might be disconnected from the world is there sufficient evidence of self-organization by which there is coupling between different scales if you like the scales of neural firing and the scales of belief that might be reflected in fire or it might not be. I think you don't need to apply the notion of self-organization to understand the physiology of jawless but you do need to understand it to find out what is quintessential about the conscious brain even if it can't tell you it's conscious. And I'm sure that's in the sort of hierarchy and in that separation of spatial and temporal scales that clearly you in your head believe is crucially tied ethlaminic orally interactions and possibly bits of the brain which you might say the prefrontal cortex and I'm sure you'd have something to say about self-organization as something which is you know to crack that I think you're in much closer to cracking the concept. It's not totally open. There is a lawful set of correlations and they're increasingly available but yeah I agree. What you said about Feynman and making something. Only when we knew how to make a pump could we understand the heart and only after making sonar could we understand bets. So we are not yet at the point that we can make an artificial brain our computers are so much worse the hardware and software combined so much worse it's dealing with everyday life than our brains are. So by the time we can make an artificially intelligent robot either physically or in a computer program ideally physically moving around if that robot can really behave like a human. I think we will be much much closer to answering the question how hard a heart problem is and until we are close to that these questions of what is consciousness and what is not even on the level of information processing it would be like trying to understand the heart without knowing much about pumps. My impression is that it doesn't agree with that. With the robot that will become increasingly self-aware. I don't see any difference in principle between robots and biological brains. I think it's very difficult to see how all this silicon inside a robot should give you consciousness but it's equally difficult to see how a bunch of neurons inside a brain should give you consciousness but somehow the neurons in the brain go along with consciousness. I don't see why silicon should be any worse than principle. I suspect that everything we know about the brain and thinking about cognition in general seems to suggest that what matters is the information processing and the representation of the world and so on. I don't think that's got a lot specifically to do with neurons as opposed to silicon. I think for example if you replace my neurons my neurons start wearing out and you replace them with prosthetic neurons made of silicon one at a time and the question is what's going to happen to my consciousness? As long as those prosthetic neurons are doing their job right and connecting up to the other neurons I'm at least going to keep responding the same way. Is there any reason to think my consciousness is going to fade out or suddenly disappear? I don't see why not. I guess I'm inclined to agree with Pete that if we had the robot that was functioning as if it was conscious it would probably be conscious but that alone doesn't tell us, doesn't solve the harm problem. We're a complete blueprint of Pete's brain right now and that wouldn't necessarily solve the harm problem. I would say the harm problem will remain equally hard but our chances to deal with it will become better. We have not only one example of biological consciousness but if we get more than one example then we can approach the harm problem from different angles and maybe deal with it better. But I suppose David's point about that is if we have a conscious robot David would say perhaps we can't understand how it's conscious just by understanding how the silicon works. We'd have to invoke a primitive of consciousness to understand it. So you're speculating about our theory about any kind of consciousness that it's silicon even though you built it. I guess you would say even though we built this conscious robot we don't know how it works just by thinking about silicon. We have to invoke something else and that's what I'm not really to take that point. I don't know how we're going to have to explain that theory later and maybe we will be able to explain it by thinking about how the silicon works. But David already knows that that's not going to be sufficient. One thing that is likely true, once we can produce these computational bases for consciousness and robots we'll have the room to do a whole bunch of experiments like come up with variations on the computational system and take this part away and take this part away and see what matters in producing the consciousness associated responses that might actually give us a whole bunch of relevant data. I don't know about the ethics of this, producing new conscious robots with impaired consciousness but I'm principle of what the basic asthma problem is. In Ryan's movie, what you said earlier about the matter state, because maybe at some point there are aspects of the matter state that once you get to the descriptors that are important in the brain, our material to what we associate with consciousness and then it becomes a problem that makes contact with things like strength theory or whatever that become important to the work you do. Do you have any intuitions about that? Absolutely. The history of physics when Maxwell discovered the right equations, he posited an ether in which the equations were vibrations and it was just a too bitch leap to imagine that vibrations without a carrier. But now we have accepted and children learning in school or as undergraduates and we sort of say of how it is and nobody talks about an ether anymore. So I think the notion of on-psychism or any of that, I think that it's an intermediate guidance towards a direction of where to go and what an ether less or a pen, a psychism less theory will be. Nobody can know. We have to get more data and the beauty of natural science is that if you get more data you can sharpen your theory which tells you how to look for better data and that sharpen your theory. It really, it's never that the one gives the other. It is interplay. That's my guess too. The measurements are going to drive this and we just don't have a lot of them right now. But I think what is important to realize here is that until we study consciousness, whether it's origin of matter or of life, anything in biology or physics, you all can start with space and time and the distribution of matter. Even the origin of life, it's a rearrangement of molecules in space and time. If once you start about consciousness, then our understanding of space and time and molecules is generated in our consciousness. So certainly we have to really question, can we do the type of reductionism in which we start with the stage of space and time and then in that stage we find the rules of the game. But for the first time the stage is produced in the phenomena we want to study. So it's a little bit, again, sorry to go back to physics, but I know that many physicists are arrogant and they want to explain everything as physics. I try not to be that way, but I use the metaphors of my trade, like everybody tends to do. Within physics, special relativity tells you what happens if you go at fast at very high speed and how time and space change. But it's different from general relativity. General relativity tells you how matter, warps and curves space and the curved space influences matter. That is a circle. So general relativity is much more difficult on a technical level than special relativity and also much more interesting. It can generate black holes, it can explain the big bang because you have the gravity influence, influencing space and time and space and time and influence and gravity. And I think that is a reasonable metaphor, only as a metaphor, I'm not trying to explain anything, metaphor for the mind-world problem. Use your mind to understand the world and in the world you have brains which somehow are connected with the mind. You ready to take questions from the audience? A while ago, a young guy who was minimally conscious was given something like ambient by his mother and he was suddenly alert after a long time. And that's been duplicated with a few others. What's going on? So if you're interested you can type in Zolta them which is the trade name for ambient in eLife, E-L-I-F-E and the first Google hit will be a paper that we published on three patients like this. And we have an idea about what we think is going on. But in very short description, what's going on is that in the patients who respond, that drug is creating an activation in an interesting way like other drugs that are sedating like anesthetic drugs. There's an early phase where the brain has an excitation before it goes down. And when you give ambient or other medications like it to produce these effects, it's in a low dose, they call it a subsetitive dose. And it sort of creates this wave of excitation. What we think is happening is these patients are living on the edge of being able to catch a right on that wave and become active. And the measurements in the paper and the theory and its elaborate. It says why we think the cells in the thalmo cortical system are poised on the edge of being able to catch that wave and then ride with it for a few hours. And then over time, this allows the brain to be much more active in an expressed behavior. And it can be very dramatic and this is all free on the web. You can see the videos of one of the patients where the effect is very clear. So these are the effects that you're seeing? Well so it's an effect across the whole system of the brain. But we think that the primary effect is in the central thalamus and the frontal cortex and that the rest of the system follows the changes there. But that's the theoretical part. The measurements are the measurements and they're very lawful. You can see the paper. So this is the fancy version of coffee. It's the fancy version of coffee with a lot more bells and whistles and much more effective at least in these contexts. Most of the time we put it, you took it, we would go to sleep. So I see. Within the limits of what's ethical to test, are any of you taking an evolutionary view and looking at consciousness in other animals or are you starting from the assumption that we're the only conscious animal? I don't think any of us make that assumption. However, it is through the primary data that each of us has about consciousness comes from the first person case. It's because of my own consciousness that I believe there's consciousness at all. So the only thing I'm certain of with respect to consciousness is that I have it, maybe that humans have it. Beyond that it's got to be an extension and the speculation that said, I think a lot of people are making interesting models of consciousness in non-human animals. I don't know if that applies to anybody here. I would agree with what you said. I mean, ultimately the problem we have is that if we want to know somebody's conscious, we need some way for them to let us report it. And so I mean, I agree with David. I mean, a lot of animals are conscious, but I can't communicate with them. So the human communication problem sets the operational criteria for us right now. And you're born baby. Great question. Yeah. Same issue arises. Same issue arises. I think you have an inference of continuity. I'm trying to puzzle things out. You know, in my mind, a kind of a continuum, if we interject mind, so brain mind and consciousness in an attempt to distill this, I'm thinking there are these experiments in which a problem is presented to the subject. And in one of them, somebody just makes this, there's a window shade with a thing hanging down and they take their finger and it make it swing. And in trying to solve, it has no relationship to the problem, which is to bring two, to tie something together. And they solve, they come up with a solution. However, when asked about the solution, they never mentioned that they saw, what would you call, you know, hanging from the shade, this thing coming down. They never mentioned that they observed this thing swinging and made an association that brought about the solution to the problem. In my mind, that's a narrative. So theoretically, it might be possible to, if you have the brain hooked up, to find out what parts of the brain are involved in this process. So we might be able to distill mind to some extent in relationship to brain through the measure as neuroscientists are doing. On the other hand, to the extent that anybody believes in psychic research, there seems to be some evidence of psychic phenomenon if you accept that this is a science at all, the statistics that show more than a random or an accidental, you know, number of times that somebody comes up with something. That strikes me like the multi-universe, that you have a string theory, and you can't test for it at the other end of the extreme. So what I'm asking is, is this somewhere in that an approach where you might distill consciousness separate from mind in relationship to brain in an attempt to apprehend the name of this discussion, apprehending consciousness, in an attempt to apprehend consciousness as distinct from brain or distinct from mind's relationship to brain? Does that make any sense? I would say the difference between string theory and multi-first is that a string theory is probably testable, but we don't have the tools yet. So either in the future, it could be 10, 20 years, it could be a thousand years, we were likely to find, to develop some sort of tool to test string theory, and if somebody is very clever, they may suddenly realize that among their physical observations, cosmic rays, neutrinos, whatever, there is already a test of string theory. In some ways, we are close, so it may happen. Multiverse, on the other hand, if you have other universes which are causally disconnected, then in principle, you cannot make connection with them. So that's a very different type of ignorance. There are levels of ignorance which are different. So if somebody would say there may be consciousness not connected with matter, and if the theory would postulate that there is no interaction between them, then as an empirical scientist, it doesn't make a difference. It's like saying there are elementary particles more weakly interacting than neutrinos, so weakly that there is no interaction at all. Oh yeah, there may be those particles, but they are not part of physics because they don't make a difference. But I'm saying, can you, if with the experiments between brain and mind in neuroscience, can one get to a point maybe similar to that where we can see in some way that there is something like consciousness, but we can't identify it, the situation that you are saying with strength theory and relationship to multiverse, we're not in a place yet to identify consciousness where we're at, but we can see that it's separate from the reductionist mind-grained business. You know, in other words, experiment with mind and brain and neuroscience will bring us closer to that correlation, but we're still left with some X. I think what you're saying, some X possibly being there that we're not yet close enough to have a system for, but we can be more certain that there's a distinction now between brain and mind, and we have an alternative to a reductionist being left simply with that. I mean, my view is there's something missing in our theories that need to be added, for example, to the ontology of physics to give you an explanation of consciousness. And the question is whether that's just adding, you said X, so the question is whether X just equals consciousness, whether that's the extra thing you need to add a peat and a paper 20 years ago said, well, maybe it could be something else, it needn't be consciousness. For example, I think his analogy was explaining motion in terms of space. Well, you can't quite do it, you go to add something, but you add motion or you add time, or you add time to space and you get motion, maybe there's something else, X. We add that to physics, we get consciousness. It's just to say that's an open possibility to it. Well, I could also add to the beginning part of your question another neuroscience approach to think of when we're dealing with intuitive problem solving is, and your example is that we can make intuitive decisions, is something we study in neuroscience, and the intuitive decisions we think about as being driven by implicit learning. So in other words, their decisions made with information we don't know we have. And so there's nothing we don't need to postulate some extra process there. We understand that sometimes we make strategic decisions, and sometimes we come up with an answer, some insight that's coming out of our implicit knowledge, information we've acquired, and so we can understand how those two types of memory interact. And so this is another approach that is not open to saying there's something missing. We think we have a story there about how these decisions are being made. Yeah, I'm not jumping to the metaphysics, but I'm asking, do you have to say, well, the intuitive, can you find it in the mind brain, like neuroscience? We can find implicit learning in the brain. Yes. And from the dualness of the whole system? Well, a couple of things you mentioned, and also to the previous question about sort of how far at the evolutionary scale would you go before you thought consciousness of the sort we're talking about emerges. In my little world, the X is inference. So in my simple world, consciousness means inference. And talking about narratives, talking about strategy immediately tells you that you have the equipment to make inferences about counterfactuals, about things that have not yet occurred. The discussion we're having about hierarchies immediately tells me that the model I have of the world is a hierarchical model, and that immediately puts certain formal constraints on or differences, distinctions between animates or organisms that have deep hierarchical models and shallow hierarchical models. So a virus, from my point of view, does do inference and has a very primitive form of consciousness. But by virtue of the fact it doesn't have a deep hierarchical model. It doesn't have the depth. It doesn't have the self-reflection. It can never represent its representations. I think what you're talking about when you talk about narratives and strategy, again, coming back to the brain as a scientist, the ability to plan an experiment and choose amongst different experiments or different ways of sampling the world is somewhat unique to higher organisms. I think that in terms of building sub-organised robots that show conscious-like behaviour, it is that prospective, both a deep hierarchical model, with the ability to free oneself from time. So you now have a representation of the world, not just now, but in the future. I think that's a... So is that almost like an add-on in your mind, like a world-free object as popper and an echos would have put it, you know, inference and our deep hierarchical model in addition to the basic laws of physics or is it... I would actually have the basic laws of physics without reflection of that deep inference. I have a good idea. My deal list is over here. And Brian comes first in the world. I have a question for you, quickly. So you've mentioned implicit memories and tacit problem solving. Do you think that there's something it's like to be a human? I think that there's something that's not a problem solving. Do you think that there's something it's like to be an organism that can only perform implicit problem solving and have implicit memories? So you're asking me the zombie question. I mean, sort of, although, I mean, I'm just curious what your answer is. So are these... Is this like a different kind of consciousness you're talking about? Or is there the light... I mean, yeah, is it the zombie question, but yeah, are the lights on or off when someone is... Well, I think we have to be a little tentative the same way we are with the coma patients. So when someone demonstrates some knowledge that they're not aware of, you're asking, are they a little bit aware of it? Or is there nothing? And so, is that... So it seems that there's nothing that it's like to... Actually, you can ask the same question of perception, right? So if I show you something subliminally and your behavior betrays that that information was processed, do you have some awareness of that? And I would say, well, no. That's how we're defining it. That's how we're understanding it, that you were influenced by the subliminal information, but not aware of it. Is that your question? I think most of our... Maybe it's just me, but I think most of my life goes on sort of in that sort of implicit tacit way of mode of being. And so the question of consciousness for me becomes the question of when the system is trying to access itself. That's right. So I think most neuroscientists would say that most of what the brain is doing, we're not aware of. Right. But even if I speak one sentence, when I begin to leave the sentence, I don't know yet how it ends. So each sentence is a mystery and an adventure. EEM force. It's translational stuff. It sounds like, you know, people are talking in different languages, and I'm not sure that I'm getting what everybody is saying, and maybe I'm just being redundant with my question. But I've been trying to think of this. Consciousness seems to be graded, you know, and so that when we have, you know, most of the time we're running on a habitual mode. And then if we're doing some kind of pattern matching, and that pattern that we're being exposed to doesn't fit what we're our expectations, in order to make safe predictions about the future. And then suddenly we up the ante in terms of the amount of brain that we are synchronizing. It seems like that reward system, stuff like that is actually part of some kind of switch that actually enhances the access or the prefrontal cortex to amplify a more granular approach to a pattern matching that allows for more elementary particles to start to be recomposed into a pattern that may be more fresh than UVO. And it is that in that, in this discussion of consciousness, you know, is about this synchronization process and accessing a broader network that includes more self-awareness so that we can get some sense of who we are in relationship to this thing that we're, you know, which doesn't fit our expectations. And so we're doing that pattern optimization thing. And then that leads to utilizing a different pattern to drive our behavior. Does that make sense? I think it does. It strikes me again a notion of hierarchy quite gracefully, it conveys all these issues. So Helmholtz's unconscious influence was right at the level of the visual cortex, and you're not aware of that. As you say, we go around using our vision all the time, you talk about patterns, patterns by definition are relationships amongst elements, therefore you're naturally invoking hierarchy. You're talking about speech that has a temporal extent that an instant doesn't have. Again, you're invoking a temporal hierarchy of separation and temporal scales. I think nearly everything that everybody has said in some way speaks to the notion of modeling upon modeling upon modeling in a hierarchical sense to give you a deep hierarchy. And for free, well not for free, but almost inevitably, again, this comes back to what we understand by the physics of self-organization. The deeper, the more global, the more fiesque you get in the hierarchy, the greater the temporal extent of your, of the things that are brought together or subsumed under the patterns. So a sentence or a narrative by definition is deep, deep, deep in the hierarchy that sees all the stuff on the surface and in the deep past and possibly in the deep future. So I think that you can relax a lot of the distinction between unaware and unaware or aware of being aware or aware of being aware of being aware of being aware and so on, within a hierarchical, within a hierarchical sense of perspective. Very expensive. So I think that we try to conserve our energies and we continue to use this habitual system and then only when our predictions are not going to be met because there's not a good fit with the current expectation, the current pattern that's being used. That's when we access this, the prefrontal cortex and then do this more granulosizing and may even make a new assignment in terms of a new attractor net, you know, with a higher node that instantiates a novel pattern that responds to this, this current situation that we're in that didn't meet, you know, previous patterns. I am new into philosophy, so right now I'm very confused and divisible and I have a question but it's more related to pansecism. I was reading that is the view that is consciousness, that everything has consciousness. So a person can show you that he's conscious, blinking their eyes, a dog can show you consciousness rolling around but how a chair can show me consciousness. I don't understand that. Well, one of the issues with consciousness is it's very hard to know decisively whether any other system is conscious. The flip side of that is very hard to know decisively that any other system is unconscious. The one really good case, as Diko mentioned, is with people because they can at least tell us what they're conscious of and you can even raise questions about that but most of us are happy to go along with that, verbal report when it's present. But when it's not present then we no longer have that materials for those materials for inference. So monkeys and dogs and mice, well some people are prepared to say there's enough analogs of what's present in humans to ascribe consciousness. But as that disappears then we're left more in the dark. But that doesn't mean that, you might say, well in those cases we should say it's not conscious once you get down to a bacteria or a virus or a quark. But I think that would be, you might say that's an overreaction. There's an absence of evidence for consciousness but there's not evidence of the absence of consciousness. We must separate those two things. You might say, well going in we should just say we're agnostic. So the question is two possibilities. The quark is conscious or it's not. Now you might say on antecedent grounds it's awfully unlikely that a quark should be conscious and fair enough that's an intuition. But there are also philosophical systems that want to say that some precursor of consciousness is present at this bottom level of reality and there are even scientific theories like Chanones that tend to at least give some motivation for ascribing consciousness to simple systems. I think the basic answer is there's no direct evidence of consciousness in systems or a long way from the paradigmatic human cases. At best we've got to work with, but there's likewise no direct evidence of unconsciousness. So we're left in this difficult philosophical situations of having to make indirect inferences which may always remain somewhat speculative. Okay, so I might just be like a presumptuous undergrad student right here. So I'm affected all the time by people's consciousnesses all around the world in this social consciousness because I have this social media and kind of connection to people pass in this room or pass in my direct world. And so I'm kind of wondering is there that social consciousness is that different than what we've ever seen before because we have so much more connection than any time before. And then kind of past that we've talked a lot about consciousness in time and space. And if we do have that social consciousness is it outside of any sort of time and space than we've ever worked in before especially because we can travel across time zones so easily and then pass that with our mental time travel we can go into predicted future and then also absolute archived past. And so we know through that. And so I'm kind of wondering how is that affecting the immediate research and what we're thinking about versus our social consciousness. Tonight we're all going to time travel one hour into the future. So but does that mean that like we don't we don't kind of think about our new social consciousness that I've kind of termed all of a sudden in a system of time and space that we've ever thought about it before is that true or am I just kind of going too far out there. It's funny because being a physicist I claim I own space and time and you are all visiting me in space and time. But seriously it's an extremely interesting question. I mean I'm a multi-cell organism as you are and none of you cells as far as we know are conscious but you have this different consciousness. So now we have this internet with billions of people being connected. Is there a kind of consciousness which we are not aware of? It's an extremely interesting question and I don't have any answer. Does anybody? This is a good question. Thank you. Yeah. So I noticed that there aren't any historians on this panel. Yes. Used to be. And so I won't infer any insult. I wonder if you think there's anything that the history of the neuroscience is or maybe the history of ideas can offer to this conversation. Sure. I'll take that. I used to be. I did a history in philosophy of science degree a long time ago. I think it does. There's a lot of very interesting rich information and in my field and the subfield of thinking about thalmicortical mechanisms underlying consciousness. There's a lot that I learned from going back to work that was done in the 40s, 50s and 60s. And into the 70s. Some of the work that was done there is very contemporary. It's just sort of been lost because of interesting historical shifts and how things were funded through study sections and through grant applications. And there's quite a lot. And whenever you get into fields like physiology where the experiments are hard and there's a lot of detail in them, there's always something to learn if you go back and read good experimental work where all the details were taken down. So I mean I could fill that in with lots of examples but I think the answer is yes. There are points in history where people were actually much more sophisticated about consciousness in some respects than we are. I mean even the history of psychophysics, history of psychology in the mid-19th century was really conceived as the study of consciousness and that was the primary data. In many respects it was there was certain kinds of sophistication that have since been lost in philosophy. Well there's the phenomenological tradition say from the early 20th century. I've been recently trying to, you know, talking a lot to people who study Buddhist philosophy where there's a tradition of really meditating on consciousness from the inside. I think even if you don't take on board all the metaphysical or theoretical conclusions that went along with these worldviews, we've a lot to learn by studying their methods for gathering the data of consciousness from a subjective perspective. And I think there is a parallel in both physics and chemistry. Physics started with the observation of the motion of the planets and the data from the motion of the planets came from the Babylonians. And the Babylonians saw the planets as gods moving around and having a good time or a bad time fighting each other. But then the Greeks took the data from the Babylonians and stripped off the mythological they had their own mythology, the Babylonian mythology. And they made the mathematical framework and that ultimately helped us to get science of the ground. There is in physics and in chemistry the alchemy, most of the alchemy books were absolutely full of allegorical connections with this and that and the other thing. And then chemistry came from the distillation of the factual knowledge inside of all of that. So it would have been very difficult to start physics without the Babylonians. It would have been very difficult to start chemistry without using the alchemy database. And similarly I think if you don't use the Buddhist database at the very least and I don't say that in this respect, I say that in complete respect for all the observations that have been made and all the inferences, it would be a shame if we wouldn't use that and it would be very different from the physics and chemistry history. That makes a lot of sense. Hi. Hello. Hi. Firstly, thank you so much for your contributions today. It was excellent. My question is about beliefs. So I was wondering if there are any new findings or exciting research on how our beliefs when reinforced health firmer versus held more loosely, how, you know, what the relationship with that is with the flow, the speed, the very nature of consciousness. Perhaps I can address that from the point of view, Bayesian beliefs. So there's in the past decades, only two decades, there's a theme in neuroscience loosely summarized as the Bayesian brain. Comes along in different guys' predictive processing or predictive coding. So the idea is that the brain is a statistical organ that's generating explanations for its sensory imports according to Bayesian principles. And in that sense, that Bayesian framework does actually give you a formalism in which you can write down and quantify beliefs, Bayesian beliefs that are probability distributions. And those ideas can be traced back to Helmholtz and unconscious inference and write back to the students of Plato just getting a historical twist into the answer. So much of what I was saying in terms of inference and consciousness presupposes that the understanding of the brain's function can be described at the level of beliefs. And what I meant by beliefs was simply probability distributions over fictive constructs that explain the data that I am sampling from the world. But there might be beliefs that are not as well formed as... So we say the word belief and we have the belief that it's Saturday and that we're sitting in this room. But presumably there's lots of other kinds of beliefs that would fit this model that don't have that strict kind of formal, articulate, transferable structure. Just thinking about the beliefs, the proto beliefs that an infant might have or an animal, tacit beliefs that sort of work to sort of form and structure our behavior but that we never entertain consciously but they still have some, they might still have shared this kind of Bayesian structure. So there's also the question that the philosopher always asks is like, what do you mean by belief and then there's these different kinds and they might all fit into the sort of topic of consciousness but they all might also play different roles. Thank you. I wanted to contribute something to the different states of consciousness as a self-report and have you respond to it. At 14 I had a concussion playing football. I was aware of events immediately after the concussion and then out of awareness for an extended period of time then back in awareness. About eight years ago I had an experience of transient amnesia which is fairly common to football players as they age. During the period of transient amnesia I talked the EMS squad out of taking me to the hospital and have no memory of it. I was driven to Long Island Jewish Hospital. I recognized the road to the hospital. I was then out of awareness for about 18 hours. I came to arguing with a psychiatrist that they weren't doing anything for me. At which point I was fully aware and quite angry at the hospital that nobody was paying attention to me which apparently I was aware of though I wasn't aware of. During this period I experienced and I had to have you react to it. Different states of awareness that were both physical and implied a great deal about memory because when I came back to myself as I say it I was aware of who I was. In the other states though I was reactive to the environment and reactive to other people I wasn't aware of who I am which implies a different state of consciousness involving some self-awareness and memory or identity which I didn't hear expressed here at all. That we have in consciousness a sense of identity. I'm sure we both have comments on this because I've been on the other side of your experience interacting with people having transient global amnesia. I took it in. I took it one more step which I'd like to give you. I've had a brain scan. I've had an EEG scan. I had a brain scan for medical reasons not associated with the original concussion. I followed this stuff on the NFL and high school football injuries very closely. When I had the amnesia I contacted the people doing the NFL studies when I found out that all players after 65 have these transient amnesia states. But I also had an EEG recently which in fact might have showed me the area that was originally damaged in the concussion and the compensations if it is to be believed. The question I have is about identity being part of consciousness. I'll start because I think you'll have more to say about this. I've been on the other side of this talking to people. I obviously wasn't there talking to you. With global amnesia you may not know a lot of things. There may be aspects of your autobiographical memory. Certainly where you are and why you are there goes away. But you can be very conscious. It is a question of what you can access in memory and what you remember about what happened. And I think there are all these different memory systems and perhaps more labored ads will follow. But I suspect that it's just another example of how you can take components out of the integrated experience of normative consciousness and remove them but still have very much a conscious mental state. That's why it's highly multivariate when you start looking at what normal consciousness provides you with in terms of awareness. Because if you are trained to observe certain things you are aware of some things that other people aren't trained to listen to music or look at a picture or pick up on nuances of facial expressions aren't aware of. That's sort of a small version of the larger theme. If you start losing parts of your memory or types of your memory things are very weird. If you go under anesthesia and you are given an amnestic you will talk to the surgeons and you will be fine. You won't remember any of that discourse or any of that period. But you haven't actually lost a component of your memory. You just had something that sets you up to wipe out the memory trace for later. There are a lot of games you can play. So you're right the fact that you remember nothing after that anesthesia doesn't mean you weren't fully aware at that moment. I think it's interesting the other point you made about these separate components. Of course our own awareness a really important part is our self-consciousness and our complex concepts that brings in. But you can put that aside and we could take language and put that aside and still have a quite rich subjective experience to try to understand. So these are in a sense optional parts. There may be very interesting parts to examine and important parts. But we can also study consciousness with those aside and try to understand them. So there are many studies of amnesia. Some with chronic amnesia where you can see that people can't lay down memories of their experiences. But they seem to be quite with it in the moment. So it's possible to be fully conscious and not lay down memories. So that doesn't mean your consciousness was completely distorted but different in some very interesting ways. And your observation I think is extremely interesting and is listening very carefully to kind of what you experience the continuity of your assessment of the neglect in the ER which is a very common theme. I'm sure everybody's experienced that in the modern day. And then, you know, so that's the clue that there was something that was kind of gradually making its way back and had continuity between the two states for you. And that's also interesting. And maybe it's because it has a limbic balance. And this is that I heard the discussion of consciousness without the concept of identity. But is there a sense of oneself and consciousness or is there periods of time in which I was reactive to the environment? I argued to not be taken to the hospital, though I should have been taken to the hospital. But I have no awareness of it. Would the concept of self or identity be implicit in this? Some ways in the idea of consciousness. People often distinguish consciousness, primary consciousness, consciousness of the world from self-consciousness. I would think of self-consciousness as one variety of consciousness and especially important variety, but certainly not as exhausting all of consciousness. And it might even be on this view that, for example, a dog or a mouse might have primary consciousness without consciousness of itself. And one take on what was happening in your situation is that there was consciousness of the world without a whole lot of self-consciousness, of consciousness of your identity. I'm not sure. That's the right diagnosis. It could be that you had some consciousness of yourself and you weren't laying down memories. But there are good examples of this. So there are developmental stages where self-consciousness becomes more evident and easy to measure. And then in other types of brain injury, there are slower, more slowly evolving recoveries of self-awareness as a stage of recovery. So you can dissociate these things. And there are people who have studied this very precisely. There are two selves to talk about, too. There's the sort of self that seems connected to experience, even if it's a very kind of loose sense of identity just in an instant or a kind of self-identity that persists over time for which we experience it as relatively continuous. But when you have an injury or you black out, then you sort of, there's a discontinuous personal identity over time. So then there are philosophers who do think that any experience of consciousness sort of has to have that at center of gravity, a self. And then there are others who don't. I wanted to bring up an aspect of consciousness that seems pretty important to me, but I don't think anyone's really raised this, but the moral implications of consciousness. I mean, I think all of us think that it's probably wrong to hurt other human beings, but it's probably not wrong maybe to pull the plug on someone who's already like in a maybe comatose state or something, but then many people believe because animals have some little consciousness, it's wrong to torture them or harm them. But then if we think that maybe consciousness has something to do with the integration of information, then should we worry about things like unplugging the internet or if somebody develops an artificial intelligence, if we're not sure if it's conscious, should we give things the benefit of it out or what's your attitude about that? That's a good question. If you start becoming sympathetic to panpsychism, there's some consciousness everywhere, then you really have to worry. I mean, some people think they shouldn't eat anything, which is conscious, but well, maybe we're going to have to draw the line somewhere else if consciousness is very extensive. I mean, that kind of, you know, there is this intuition that consciousness is what matters because morally, but as you start thinking about degrees of consciousness getting lower and lower, I mean, simpler and simpler systems, you also start to think about matters might be the kind of consciousness. Maybe there are kinds of consciousness that matter more than others, you know, suffering, for example, my carrier, the special moral way to maybe beings with the capacity for a conscious thought and reflection that carries a lot more weight than beings with simply the capacity to sense hot and cold. I do agree with you that consciousness is the ultimate ground, I think, of our moral concern for other beings. So that's got to be somehow where it starts, but you know, exactly what kinds of consciousness matter. And with respect to human consciousness, that's how most of the law and most of the moral intuitions have evolved around whether, so the, you know, the, on the medical ethics side, the negative right to withhold medical treatment or have medical with treatment withheld was founded on the lack of a potential for recovery of cognition and consciousness. And I think, you know, what's evolving now is, of course, as we understand the recovery of consciousness and the variations of potential, then there's a lot of questions about how we, how we start to look at the opportunities that are for people to become more conscious and the moral obligations to them to become more conscious. My colleague Joseph Fins is a book coming out in July called Rights Come to Mind, which is a full exploration of these issues, lived through the experience of people taking care of patients with disorders of consciousness. And you know, most of these issues are unsolved in our system from a legal and a medical point of view. So it's, you know, I think you're right to pinpoint consciousness as the, as David said, just the core, you know, issue around moral warrants and, you know, getting into this space. Thank you. Great conversation this afternoon. Wondering if whether you think it's accurate to grade consciousness from an external perspective, when consciousness is such an internal experience, i.e. the quality of experience, this whether you're a human animal, non-human animal, or an individual who experiences a cognitive disability question, has research been able to determine a consistent experience of consciousness between those with and without cognitive dysfunction? And if so, what does this imply in terms of the ability to provide a universally accepted definition of consciousness, except in the most general sense? Of course, we could use neurons, for example, to explain consciousness, but only in the most rudimentary sense of what consciousness is. I would say research has not provided a clear and distinct set of measurements to categorize things that way. It might want to go. Well, so we do our best if you're asking a person to make a decision, we understand that someone with dementia may not be capable of making a good decision. They're legal precedents for how to deal with those situations and form consent and so forth. So we have some operational ways to proceed. That's the behavior and sort of speech acts. I was thinking in terms of measurement. That's what I'm thinking. I'm thinking in terms of measurement, too, or an outside evaluation of what it has to do. I think a lot of questions circulate around the issues of experiencing a disability and how we rate an individual and who does not experience this life in the same way we think they should experience that life and from our own perspective. And even the idea of dogs and babies and this kind of hierarchy that we are kind of creating a definition of consciousness and what's of great value and perhaps what is a lesser human experience if we put in the realm of just the human experience. There are some really interesting studies of consciousness in schizophrenic patients compared to in normal patients using a beeper methodology. They get people to carry around beepers that go off at a certain point during the day and at that point patients are asked to write down in their logbook what were you conscious of at that moment when the beeper went off. And it's extremely interesting even for normal patients but Russ Holbert who's pioneered this method has done it with schizophrenic patients as well and has found certain really clear systematic differences between the consciousness in these patients and in ordinary unimpaired subjects. This is in a way it's a methodology to take something external, the beeper and the records in a logbook, numberless use it as a guide to what's going on internally. Thank you. My understanding is we have sensory perceptions. All right we have eyes, we can see things to varying degrees and we have hearing which we use to communicate and that I think does affect our consciousness. So the question is then is what about someone like say Helen Keller who was born both deaf and blind. So what can we say about her awareness or her experience, her consciousness of the world since she has lacked these two different perceptions or these two sensory perceptions? That's a great example and actually it's one that got my interest a long time but the best way to find out is to read her perceptions of it. And so there's a fabulous account of her early years before Anne Macey Sullivan was her teacher who came to work with her and to establish her ability to communicate and to start to learn and she describes herself. She actually doesn't, it's very interesting, she doesn't even describe herself with her own name. She calls herself phantom and her memories of being pre-cognitive. She describes them as being reactive to an external world that just she had experiences with and most of them were limbic and she just, her memory is thrashing out at things coming into her peripersonal space effectively. And there's a small section in the book teacher that she wrote where she talks about this. But you know, you get the sense there's something primitive, you know, awareness but it was very unstructured. It wasn't structured by language, it wasn't structured by concept and it wasn't very much fun for sure. But then you get the sense that by the time that she's an adult and you know she's giving lectures at Harvard and she's a fully educated woman, she has a very full normal human consciousness with a very unique perspective, you know, everybody has an identity but it's not as alien as a conscious state as what she describes herself as before. She had some way of connecting with the human community. It's very interesting but I think that's the place to go look is what she had to say about herself. Thank you for this discussion. One sees how many complex aspects they are to consciousness and I'm going to speak now as an artist where the idea of consciousness is since at least the middle of the 20th century very complicated because a whole series of determinology came about automatic writing. You ask an artist what did you mean when you did this and they said I don't know I was unconscious and one realizes now that that word no longer is valid even for an artist to say they were unconscious because there are so many layers as we can see as we're speaking about what consciousness is. So if an artist says I don't know what I was doing we know that they were very conscious on many different planes and levels and so I'm sort of interested in the idea of people speaking about conscious and unconscious and automatic writing or things that are how do you see the connective points that way. You see it now as one uniform level of consciousness with many facets and planes. Well, so my brother is an artist and he considers his painting to be very intuitive style so he has a lot of expertise in the media he uses but he goes after a process that happens on the canvas and he considers it very intuitive so I consider that part of implicit memory and part of his mental capacity is to do that without designing it as an explicit painting that he is conceiving it. It's a process that unfolds so is that connected with what you're saying. Well, there's another word intuitive. Do we have to redefine intuitive? I mean, in other words, I think there are redefinitions that become necessary because they once were put into categories and I see it as a more fluid aspect. You know, without all these divisions that characterize what's rational, what's irrational, what's spontaneous. Well, you know, we have all these divisions because that's how we try to understand things in science and we divide them up and then we try to understand how they fit together and how they interact. Yes, it's very fluid but we take some steps to divide them up because that's how we're going to understand the parts and then put them back together. So, a very selfish question. What are the easy problems of consciousness or to be more concrete, I guess, what are you telling your graduate students to do? Well, back in the original article I wrote on the heart of the easy problems of consciousness 20 years ago, the easy problems of consciousness were basically ones about behavior and functioning. So how does the brain perceptually respond to a certain stimuli? How, for example, can we be made to control our behavior in a way that depends on what it's out there? How does the brain monitor its own processes and issue verbal reports? Basically, the easy problems on this definition, the ones all about objective functioning, the kind that can easily be measured from the outside. Whereas the hard problem is about how does all that stuff give you subjective experience? And for the most part, I take it when the neuroscientists are giving their graduate student problems, they're very often at least about those easy problems, explaining the responses, the behaviors and so on. Another class of easy problems though is finding, quote, easy problems because none of these are really easy, is the correlation issue, finding the brain process that goes along with certain kinds of subjective experience. And that's something which is also being proven to be a subject where you can make tractable, incremental progress in the lab year over year. But then there's a whole hierarchy of tractable, more and less tractable problems, so maybe other people can throw in there. You never give any hard problem to a student? In philosophy all the time. It's only hard problems in philosophy. That's a way to do that. So philosophers can do the hard problem and the scientists will chip away at it by working on the easy problems. Yeah. Thanks for your question. I mean, a lot of you have been talking about the fact that when we are conscious, we have a feeling inside that we have an experience inside and then we use other metaphor to be a conscious, like to be in an inner world or to be intrinsic or whatever. So my question is inside what? Because if we say that conscious experience is inside the mind, it's kind of circular definition because just the thing, so it cannot be literally inside the head. We do not expect to find consciousness like we find sugar in the blood. So I just wanted to ask, inside what? Well, something we haven't really talked at all about, which I guess we'll wait until the last minute to throw it out there, is that consciousness is, as far as we know, embodied. When I stub my toe, I feel pain in my toe, not in my brain, and I don't feel it in the rock that I stubbed my toe against. There seems to be this deep interface of consciousness that blends into the body, even though we've been talking about it being situated in the brain. And so when you ask the question, we've been talking about consciousness being inside what? The first thing I think of is it's inside the body. And that gets us out of that immediate circularity. And then you can say, well, what is the consciousness, the embodied consciousness inside of? And then that's a different question. Yeah. Just to follow up, when I feel that pain in my toe, it's in my body. But when I see the sound, is consciousness embodied in the sand, too, for the same reason? When I'm driving my car on the road, I think I'm filling that consciousness in the car and filling the wheels of the road directly. It's like the person with the cane. So the body doesn't, the body is at least something which is very flexible here. The boundary is very flexible. If you have the right relation to the tool, then you feel the person with the cane feels the strike of the ground, not in their hand, but in the tip of the tool. I totally feel a lot of my consciousness in the self-love. Your tacit memory. The difference in you would be the last question. Hi. We briefly had a conversation about the morality of consciousness. And I'm a moral nihilist. I was wondering, and that is that you don't inherently believe that there are any reasons to make moral judgments on anything. And so I was wondering if we're trying to make or if we're trying to contrive these moral judgments about consciousness, are we just choosing to ignore that it's a very real possibility that we live in a moral reality? Well, that sounds like a philosophy question. Well, who's to know where morality comes from? Maybe there's no absolute fundamental morality in the universe. If you go that way, you can say at the very least what we have is something like moral preferences, there are some outcomes that we prefer to other ones on reflection and moral respects. Maybe there's no deep absolute grounding for that as if it came from a God. Maybe all there is is what we've been evolutionarily programmed with. We can still make the distinction between the outcomes that we want, that we think are better morally for society and for other people on reflection. And it's going to turn into a question about our fundamental values, which may be contingent and biological, but we can still make these distinctions. And it could well be that, well, here's the thing which is what we contingently value, consciousness. That's the thing which makes our lives worth living. And we all have a great preference for being conscious and that we care about the consciousness of other people around us. I'd like to think that even a moral nihilist in some ways could recast some of these questions in terms of what we value and what we prefer. Thank you. I'm a clinical neurologist, one time I was interested in brain evolution. And I learned that there were four basic stages of vertebrate brain evolution. The most primitive is the fish brain and the reptile brain and the paleo and neo mammalian brains. And in my clinical neurology experience, I also have had the experience of patients presenting with acute stroke syndromes, which are rare, but that affect the midbrain reticular formation, which is part of the fish brain. And if a part of the brain that controls a certain function in humans exists in other animals and causes alterations of consciousness, would it be reasonable to assume that a fish is conscious if it shares that structure? Yes. It turns out there are some structures that fish share with us and some that they don't. They actually read a debate in the journal Fish and Fisheries about whether fish feel pain and one person was saying, yes, fish feel pain because they have this element of pain processing and the other one was saying, no, they don't because they don't have this element of pain processing. So it just pushes the question back, which is the thing in the brain that matters? Yeah. Well, another point about meditation, experience of people with mastered meditation, you know, each methods of really turning off the more recent brain structures and getting into a state which is really like focusing on breathing and getting into your brain stem, I guess. It's not so clear though. If you look at the data, it's actually very interesting. The states that experience meditators get into are high energy states. The dynamics are different, but they resemble more wafer brain activity than they resemble comatose brain activity. So again, it's another one of these examples where we don't have a great idea about how to go from what is a conscious brain state that's a little different than your wafer state and its dynamics to where consciousness is and that and what the changes and the representational aspects of it are because we never model it.