 My current as well is something. My voltage is about the safety. The voltage is less because the average is less. It sucks. Yeah, no, he's saying the whole puncher is bad. He's saying that us people down here have... No, too few. You're right. You're right. I need more holes. We're going to start. We normally have about 50 people in the audience, but since this is our first live meeting, I think we haven't been able yet to publicize it enough so that the people who usually come are here. The idea for... I'm the director of the Center at Nursassian. The idea for these... Between the way also separates our second decade, and something in 2012, and then we accepted to have five programs together. It was a pay because it didn't have anything live for the Nurs and the other Nurs and something that we sent to the center. We came to us by more than one of our friends. And... Elias Dockwarch. And then that coding was an important subject and had many angles to it, and maybe we should have round tables on that. And Jerry Horowitz, who is the associate director of the Center, then took this and developed amazingly five round tables. And so today, this morning, we have the first of those, and then we have four more, two more this afternoon, and two tomorrow. I want to thank all the participants who volunteered to come here and have a conversation, and I leave it to Jerry to introduce everybody, and who we take on from this. Thank you, Ed. It's a real pleasure to be back here live at the Helix Center. Let me take a moment to introduce our esteemed panelists today. I'll try to make this quick, but it's certainly interesting to thought, maybe I can introduce the idea behind this talk, which I think is a little bit unusual. So the theme of the conference is overcoding. I thought, when did the interesting start off? What did we all come to the idea of what codes are, and what coding might be? I find that, and this I'm sure is true, a lot of ideas are sort of being concretized now. That means one thing, which is sort of programming and coding, but codes have a long history, and what their meaning is, I think, is fascinating. So we'll take that up. So first, Jorgi Bzaki identified a hierarchical organization of brain oscillations and proposed how these rhythms support a brain syntax, a physiological basis of cognitive operations. His work changed how we think about information encoding in the healthy and diseased brain, such as epilepsy and psychiatric disease. Several laboratories worldwide have adopted his framework and provided supporting evidence for the two stage model of memory in both experimental animals and human subjects. Bzaki is a big professor of neuroscience at NYU. He is among the top 0.1% most cited neuroscientist, member of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, member of the academia, European, and the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. Michael Novichak is a curator and professor of paleontology at the American Museum of Natural History and senior advisor to the museum's president. From 1994 to 2021, he served as the museum's senior vice president on Provost of Science. Awarded a doctoral degree at the University of California, Berkeley, Dr. Novichak studies concern patterns of evolution and relationships among extinct and extant organisms. His interests have range from the fossil record to data on DNA sequences. He has led a participation, I'm sorry, he has led or participated in paleontological expeditions in the North American Rocky Mountain region, Baja California, the Andes Mountains of Chile, the Yemen Arab Republic, Argentina, Sahara, and Africa, Morocco, and the Gobi Deserts of Mongolia. Karen B. Stern is a professor of history at Brooklyn College of the City University of New York. Her research is deeply interdisciplinary. She studied classics with honors at Dartmouth College, her name, her MA and PhD in religious studies from Brown University, and has excavated and conducted field research in different areas of the Mediterranean, including Jordan, Greece, Tunisia, Morocco, and Israel. Several grants, fellowships and residencies from the National Endowment of the Humanities, Council of the American Overseas Research Center, and the Getty Villa have supported her research which deeply deploys methods from the fields of archaeology, anthropology, epigraphy, history, and religion, and religion to investigate the daily lives and mature culture of Jews and Christians in antiquity who inhabited areas around the Mediterranean through Arabia and Mesopotamia. David Salter is a professor of psychiatry, neurology, pharmacology, and at the School of the Arts at Columbia University and New York State Psychiatric Institute. He received a PhD in biology from Columbia University. The lab has published over 250 studies on synaptic function, particularly of the basal ganglia and dopamine systems, and neuroimmunology in normal and disease states that are cited over 50,000 times. He is founder of the Dopamine Society, the Gordon Conference on Parkinson's Disease, and the journal Nature Parkinson's Disease. He has received awards from the McKnight, Simon's, Helmsley, Narsad, Huntington's, and Aaron Diamond Foundations and the Universities of Jerusalem, Minnesota, University College of London, and National Science Foundations of Israel, Austria, Portugal, and given name lectureships at the National Institute of Health, Harvard, Yale, UCSF, Emory, UC Irvine, Irvine, and the Vatican. Mark Vandemir Koop, oh sorry, Mark Vandemirup is a historian of the ancient near East and Egypt from the beginning of writing to the age of Alexander of Macedon. Besides teaching at Columbia University, he has taught at the University of Oxford and at Yale University. He directs Columbia Center for the Ancient Mediterranean. He has published numerous books and articles on various aspects of the ancient near Eastern history, Egyptian history, and world history with interest ranging from socioeconomic and political history to intellectual history. He has written extensively on historical methodology as it applies to his field of study. In these writings, he aims both to present the materials of these fascinating ancient cultures to a broader audience and to explore new paths of research. Okay. I think we're done. So, thank you very much. So, I guess I'd like to get started with my premise of the talk, which is if one of you or several of you want to discuss your ideas of what coding and decoding means very generally. Because each of you has a certain area of expertise that goes into specific examples of decoding or coding. I'd like us to start with hieroglyphs, the Rosetta Stone anniversary stuff like that. So, that sounds good to me. Actually, the ancient languages and scripts that I may deal with are not the hieroglyphic ones from Egypt, but those from the Near Eastern, especially the first system of writing every invented in world history, the Kine Forum writing system. And there we see in the right 30000 BCE, the invention of a writing system that's quite different from what we currently use, the alphabetic writing system, but a system that mixes together science, multiple signs that indicate words for parts of words. One of my things that I'm very interested in is actually what that did to the people's perception of the universe in which they lived. Because in the way the conceit of the writing system, the way they conceived of the elements of the writing system, it was not in order to reproduce speech, but it was in order to reproduce reality and reality expressed in writing. And because it's very different from the way we perceive writing or alphabetic script, where let's say each character has one particular value or has only a value within the context of the other characters, but it's always the say a letter B, as always something to do with the maybe all impronunciation in speech, each character has multiple values, values that can sound entirely different from one another, but also that can have different meanings altogether. And what you see happening in this Knif form script is actually that they play around with a written form of anything, a name, or sentence, or something like that, and they reinterpret it using various meanings of the various elements. Obviously this is not the case for basic writings, but this is when you talk about scholarly text, ritual text, that type of thing. So you can take actually a particular sequence of signs and give them one meaning, and actually if you give each of these signs a different, you know, different play around with it, you can actually come up with exactly the opposite. So you get this, but seems to be, to us, extremely confusing, but actually the depth there is a coherent system that enables you to interpret things, and then get an understanding of anything in the universe through its written form. Well, would you say that there's more of an emphasis? It's slightly less abstract in more material, let's say the material nature of the image of these... No, it's actually nothing. So it's a very visual system of writing. The basic, and the most difficult thing to understand is that actually each element within this system has multiple values, and if you, obviously there's an apparent and immediate understanding when you read something, but if you really want to discover the full truth, the full value of something that is expressed in writing, you have to consider these other options. And so you can take a particular name and you can then interpret that name. I mean, when I said you can interpret it entirely in the opposite that's, that it does happen, but that's perhaps too extreme. But you can actually see in the name of an individual, let's say, of a God, you can find within that God's name all aspects of the powers that God has in the universe if you read that name properly. How did you feel decoded, you can inform? How much a decoded? Yeah, how did you understand what these various meanings that each of these can ask? Well, sometimes they give us this information, I mean, we have, I mean, they have scholarly material where they it's not back upon their own writings and give interpretations of their own writings. There's a long textual tradition that goes on some 3000 years. And so we benefit from the fact that, especially in the late appearance of this history, there are people who looking at texts that have been produced in the past and who make commentaries on these texts. And so there, within these commentaries, we can see how they could take certain passages and look at these passages and give them various interpretations. So you're saying that there's an unbroken tradition in Mesopotamia, which is very different than the broken tradition in Egypt. Well, no, this doesn't go into the modern era actually, the interesting thing. So this system, you have to rediscover how to rediscover it in the 19th century of the common area it was rediscovered. And it wasn't, I mean, it was already an accomplishment that said to be able to read its kind of form text because it wasn't as easy as with Egyptian hieroglyphs where you have the Rosetta Stone, which gave you an ability to understand this hieroglyphic science. But it was accomplished that once we, you know, people were able to read this text also, they became able to, scholars became able to read more complicated text and figured out that they themselves indicated sometimes, well, although you have this particular passage, that passage actually can have multiple meanings, or we can explain the meanings that that passage has, by looking at how it is written out, not by how it is pronounced. So, let's start with the basics. Coding is an agreement between the sender and the receiver. It requires a cipher. Without the cipher, there is nothing. So information is not out there, it's not in the sender, it's not in the receiver, it's a relationship. The information should be packaged and anybody who learns the Morse code knows that packaging is very important because the stop science, or you compute the language, or you can, in human languages, you have to have methods to say, this is the beginning, this is the end of the message, and this is the asset which we call cipher. Without a cipher, you can never break the code. Shampaleon, Shampaleon could decode the hieroglyphs because he was given the cipher, the Rosetta store, and that grounded an unknown language to two known languages that he spoke, he spoke like ten languages, he was equipped with the way to discover things, all my credit is for him, but without Rosetta Storne, he would have no clue. Let's see another example, he wanted to have examples. Alan Turing is well known, he is the core, the core breaker, in fact he didn't break the code. He couldn't. The core, that is the cipher, was given to him by the Polish intelligence service in 1939 by the Polish post office because they already had an enigma machine. Actually, he got two enigma machines. The enigma machines contain the key elements of which you have to reiterate, reiterate, reiterate, the same method for Shampaleon, and many other breakers used. Now, in the brain, we usually read every single cognitive science paper that the brain covers information. This is nonsense because there is no information out there. Information is always a relationship between what's out there and what is inside here. So, actually, without humans, I challenge you and say, there is no information. We make things out there and keep it as information because we know and we create the ciphers. Now, this is very general. You get the fantastic particular examples. I'm interested in this possibility though that this modern understanding of decoding, let's say where there's a key. The key, yeah, thank you. The definition of coding then gets to be, well, if you know the code, you know how to proceed to try to unpack a certain sort of information. Decipher. Right. But we, I think now have this idea that it's a way to be able to know how to speak the words to just say them out loud. But I think earlier on, it wasn't just simply a matter of turning it into an oral format. Right. Does that fair to say that that wasn't exclusively what it was about? That's exactly what you need to call. So, when I let, like to send a message, I can do it various ways. Anyways, can do it. By the way, you know, our obsession with about the human mind is just a very narrow kind of an approach because when you generate an artifact, it is a message to somebody else. And the advantage of an artifact that it will survive you and it can be given to many, many. So, it's a one to many communication and forever. And it's very easy to identify human artifacts where you go in the desert or anywhere you find anything you say, this is natural or this is a human mind. Because we are sensitive to those things that are required, the human mind's, and it's ability to construct it. So, that kind of message is what was, I'm sending messages all the time with my eyes and my gestures and so on. Land beach was an extraordinary human invention. And of course, when land beach occurred, then some of these guys around the table, including me, were very valuable because they are the people who were the ones who accumulated all that knowledge and carried the information. But when writing was invented, that was huge. And then books were invented, that was huge. And so on. But it's basically an externalization of brain function is sending messages to very signals. There is something that irritates me a lot. There are a lot of people in my field to study. So, the origins of writing and it seemed to, it would say it actually explicitly it was not a big deal. Because as you're saying, there's a system of communication pre-written or even in parallel with writing a system of communication through visual images etc or through objects and so on. And they're saying, well writing is just a similar thing parallel and it doesn't really affect the brain to, to, beyond that's what you've been saying. In my opinion, it seems that the invention of writing had a very radical impact on the functioning of the human brain. And that it made the human brain function differently. But I'm not, of course, I'm not like you are specialist in this, that it made the human brain function differently. And what about people that don't read? Yeah, thank you. Please. No, just because I, I walk the materials that I work on from antiquity are not necessarily sort of look at texts but I also look at images because in antiquity as well as in modernity, not everybody could read them right. So the fact that you have these amazing, uniform texts, whether they're just like receipts of things or more extended ones, it still requires specialization to be able to, to be able to carve those figures in those particular ways and to have that vast information at hand and to be able to read it and process it. But sure, we're not ever aware that simultaneous could do that. So for those who were able to engage in the very specialized elite activities of the production of these texts, surely it changed how they thought and it sort of had a ripple effect on how society is organized. But for many people who couldn't engage in those things, right, it took until literacy, however broadly we describe it, becomes more widespread. I think it, it probably, it's true. I mean the way bring function might have developed would be different in accordance with the relationship to those systems, by imagine. There are actually experiments in India that are more illiterate than needed and the people who were enrolled in a two year school, they were monitored with fMRI and they showed changes all over the brain almost. It's hard to point, you know, this is not a verne kind, it broke areas everywhere. But the remarkable thing, I think this is what we have to realize that our communication or cypher system is based on a generative grammar. That is of course part of the, this, this vocal language, but one was written, the key thing is that how humans figured out in all cultures, 20 to 35 elements, letters, to describe the entire knowledge of humankind. That's an extraordinary achievement and of course it was not designed, I remember no smart people, just the general smart people, and they devolved. And that's something that you can call human emotion because no other species achieved. I think what your saying is very provocative. But I'm thinking that if Homer couldn't read and write and Muhammad famously could not read or write, do you think their brains are working differently? Yeah. I do think so. You think, Muhammad who essentially wrote or Homer that wrote all this wonderful material that survives for thousands of years. He loved to be here. But he didn't, right? Yeah, but he didn't. Me too. But he didn't, and it was all sung, right? And the Quran rhymes, and no wonder people, remember it. But still, I mean, it became written, but it wasn't written by them. Christ didn't write his stuff down. And yet, so you're saying that there was this big transition in a way from Muhammad to whatever, I forgot the name of the person that described that started writing the Quran down. They would have two different kinds of brains. Okay, all right. You're focusing, I mean, unfortunate. You're focusing too much on the alphabetic writing system. And there, this is the issue of the relationship between oral and the written. And the purpose of the alphabet is to represent the oral. Therefore Socrates thought that writing was actually a bad thing because it took you one step further back from truth. Okay. But I'm saying, or arguing, is that the kiniform right is system and a hierarchical right is system for that matter. They're not alphabetic. And so in the kiniform, which I know very well, it's not, the intention is not to render speech. The intention is to render something reality in writing. Yes, you can make a connection to speech, but actually perhaps initially it was not even connected to speech. Initially, it may be just, I mean, the earliest text we have, there is no clear connection to speech. It is not a rendering of speech. It is rendering of reality in a written form. That then adjusts itself that when it comes to people who, with different languages, who use this script to start including more and more connections. Well, then I think what you're saying is the big jump isn't to writing. I mean, I know, I mean, well, facetious, but it's not to writing. It's to doing a form of writing that does reflect speech because the reason we remember the Iliad or the Quran or whatever is because they weren't done in written speech with rhyme and meter so that people could retain it. So, otherwise they would have forgotten. I want to kind of get back to this idea that at the origins of spoken oratory, but then I think especially writing, there was a little bit of a, it meant something to people who were not good at oratory for starts. They thought these folks who could do this, they were performers, they were special. And certainly once writing began, those who were illiterate formed this gigantic sort of penumbra around the illiterate, the literate folks, they saw a lot of these texts as being magical but even though they couldn't penetrate it, they realized it was magical. It was something magical about because there were experts who could derive things from it. So, it's wrong to think that it didn't have any impact at all on the illiterate. It was this group that was carried along with that. I want to say one other thing before I forget it about the brain function and that is there are these interesting neurological conditions like Alexia where people cannot read from stroke and other sort of brain knows a graphia where they cannot write. They often go together. They always go together. We know their brains are the same as brains of people before there was writing primarily. Something happened there was some transformation in their brain but it's the same brain and it's an interesting sort of mystery. For me, the perhaps fundamental distinction early languages and clearly writings is that the speech is storytelling. It's mostly about what we call episodic memory or episodic information. That is, I'm part of the agent who is communicating. Whereas the early Cunay for writings were very abstract. They were all about semantics. The semantics is of starting with counting the number of bushels, the number of bags of wheat and the number of sheep and so on. This is how the numbers emerged as an abstracting because it was a practical reflection of the activity of the humans who said I counted sheep. Now, two years ago I was counting doing something and the way I counted one, two, three, this is how the decimal system was did I, and things like that. Then all of a sudden it occurred to the person that in Cunay forms, early Cunay forms, the ten bags of wheat has different ten than the ten sheep because they specifically referred to the referred thing. Later on, somebody said, maybe ten is something I can use in counting anything. That was an explicit semantic information. Later on when the landages became more complicated or complicated but more useful, then the storytelling came back also in written languages. One has narrative text relatively soon. It's relative to the first, you know, written, you're talking about administrative text and indeed they're the primary, they're the first things found but we have narrative texts. Okay, 600 years later admittedly, it's a long time on this. The one thing that is very important in this, so indeed the administrative documents are the primary documents found in the earliest writing and this to me is very important. Alongside, there are lists of words, lexical texts, or dictionaries but they are actually in my reading of them, their study of the written word. So it sees it as it's not just making, well, what type of sign, cuneiform signs do we have that we can use in administrative text which actually takes, because they're visual signs and it takes it and it plays around with them and come up with nonsensical signs. You know, somehow they see that there is an ability to create something, a reality that is not connected to physical reality and that's purely a written reality. Michael, what do you think? Well, I am. My interest come way before language, I should say, and the work but I'm very familiar with the need and the concept is cipher. On one hand, I've been working for years, trying to what we call reconstruct the tree of life and the tree of life is an evolutionary pattern that now is an extraordinary time, at least in the last decade and a half, that DNA sequences and the genetic code is part of that evidence to reconstruct the tree. But DNA has certain limitations. 99% of all life that ever existed on this planet is extinct. And so for those fossils, except with some very few, and my friend Sponté Pablo, just won the Nobel Prize, his work, you know, except for those exceptional circumstances where the code has actually been recovered in human fossils or things that are mammoth skin and so forth, things that are very quite young, that fossil record is really, really out of the scope for DNA. So we have to rely on what actually happen, the fossils that we find, and that as Darwin recognizes, is an incredibly inconsistent and spotty record. But you mentioned cipher and I think what we have are cipher, what happens in the advance of recovering this history is the discovery of a cipher. So, and indeed almost, it's almost a platitude you see occasionally where someone will proclaim, oh I have this early hominid fossil, it's the Rosetta Stone for human evolution, you know? Everything is a Rosetta. But the reality is there are ciphers, once in a while a fossil is an extraordinary cipher. For example, Archaeopteryx, their earliest bird, shows the definitive characters of both dinosaurs and birds. And it's only in the last five or six, well the last decade that we've come to recognize that birds are not only related to dinosaurs, they are dinosaurs, they're just a branch of dinosaurs. In fact, they're a branch of theropods that are related to Tyrannosaurus, an overrafter, and a lot of things that we've collected in the Gobi. So, you know, that's our cipher. It was a combination of characters which was recognized by Richard Owen in the early 20th century. He said, hey look, this thing has some dinosaur-like characters. You didn't go much farther than that than a John Ostermet Yale went a little further and then people like Jacques Cotea and Mark, my colleague, really you know, expanded on that. And so it's, I think, we're always searching for ciphers, you know, in the fossil record. And there aren't too many. You know, it's a very rare event. That's why there's so much attention paid to it. I think speaking for the audience, can you say a little bit more about why birds are dinosaurs? That's really pretty intriguing. Well, the skeletal structure of a, if you, as Richard Owen observed, if you strip that arkyoptic skeleton of, you know, it's preserved in this incredible way in the gerolimestone with impressions of feathers. And if you strip that off this animal, it looks like a small theropod dinosaur. And it's hip structure, the orientation of the pubis, the lower limb and the very, very characteristic of a subgroup of dinosaurs, the peripod dinosaurs, with the long claws and the extended digits on the foot, and a whole variety of other characters. So, and of course, we discovered in 1993 with this very incredibly rich sight in the Gobion, and away this sight, which we named Uka-To-God, the whole sight is a cipher because it's preserved hundreds of skeletons of dinosaurs, little mammals and lizards. And compared to what we have and what we found in Mongolia, in North America, a lot of those animals, especially the smaller ones, are represented only by isolated teeth and jaws. We knew nothing about what they look like as whole animals. We called those fossil spare parts because, you know, you have to put everything together. Well, we discovered that these overrafters were nesting. We discovered the first nesting dinosaurs, and they were on a clutch of eggs, and the eggs were always in an architectural arrangement. And these dinosaurs were capable, just like birds, of parental care of their nests. So, there was once in place, there was a window open to dinosaur behavior that we never expected to find, once again, that kind of and once again reinforcing the relationship between these dinosaurs and living birds. Just to amplify this point, how important this to have a key or a cipher, the ciphers lead to game-changing ways, and the framework through which we see the world. As an example, our effects on the philosopher introduced a term called Alan Vitale. Nobody knows the young people I'm talking about. Alan Vitale was the most critical thing in the two centuries ago, because it was impossible to explain or conceive how from a seed you can make a tree or a woman sperm you can make a human. That must be a driving saw. Alan Vitale is a drive of life. And it led nowhere. All of a sudden DNA came around, it was a game changer. Nobody talks about Alan Vitale anymore. Everything is explained, because we shifted to a different framework from where things are explained in a self-explanatory manner. Well, precisely, Darwin had his theory of natural selection as solid, but his mechanism for it is completely wrong, because he didn't have that cipher. But I want to make a point about ciphers, because the cipher you referred to earlier, Jorgi, about the Rosetta Stone, was an explicit like this equals this, that equals that. There has been the ciphering that's going on here, clearly there's no key. There's no explicit key in what you're doing in paleontology. There are other methods that people have that try to make some sense of decoding what is going on. So there's frequency, the chronology, things of that nature. And also, am I wrong about this, so linear B also was decoded without an explicit key. Yeah, it is the code in the right. The frequency of the appearance of certain units, elements in the language, is used as a kind of a way to build up a key. How often in the information being imparted does what we think which would be, the letter E appears much more than other letters, the letter Z, not very much, except in your name. And mine is this part of it because everything in nature is log normally distributed. The edges are the right end of this q distribution. Exactly. No, but those sort of frequency analyses and chronologies do help to build up a sort of a key which doesn't necessarily, well, which is the best we can do. But in order to do so, don't you need to have an understanding of the general structure because indeed the letter E is more common than the letter Z within the structure of language. And those are the three words that are frequently used, but not really changing or changing much slower over the time of humankind. So they give you a language when you are looking for common words in Finoyuri for example, then we have a bunch of words that are very basic and frequently used over centuries such as blood, fingers and so on. And the rare words are changing meaning a lot. Many Greek words are used today in a totally different connotation, like empathy. Everybody knows what empathy is. The real use in Greek is called disgust. So all these transformations happen because of the way how we use language in everyday life. And these numbers or the frequency distributions are very important tools to dig out what are the common and what are the unique elements of changing language. Also I think you need a context for interpreting the key to recognize that key. So just thinking back, forgive me about the fossil record, there had to be, someone had to present the idea that these things took place over enormous amounts of time and that was a huge controversy. There was an evidence directly for the age. We didn't have radiometric dating or anything like that. There was basically a concept of time with being in this enormous expanse. And it was rejected by most intellectuals of the time until it finally took hold. So you needed some kind of context to interpret even those fossils, those cypress people were finding fossils during that time. And thinking that maybe they were casualties that didn't make it on the arc. So you had to have some kind of context for interpreting the cypress in the beginning and then first place. I appreciate to imagine it as a type of patterning to the types of materials that I work on and the way that I work on them. There is no cipher because I'm approaching it from sort of a cultural angle. So some of these things resemble letters and some of these things resemble pictures. This really just paying attention to the precise spatial context and sort of broader practical context. And looking at patterns in the distribution that enabled us to sort of create some sort of framework but interpreting them because otherwise there is no interpretation. It's not, you know, they're not words to represent something necessarily. What are those texts that you're referring to? A lot of my research is on graffiti in Aramaic or Greek in Syria and the antiquity or the Middle East. And ways in which, I mean to sort of park them back to us. You described it these ways that people produce artifacts. We just don't know necessarily what they're trying to communicate sometime except the patterns and their distribution can be helpful. If they're graffiti and burial caves or in places of prayer or worship or something like that. But these are humans who might not have been able to write a record of how many sheep or how many, well maybe if it was a very limited vocabulary they could, but they're trying to express something. I mean they're trying to commemorate a moment, an idea and it's sort of trying to get a sense of what, why they're creating this sort of artifact of presence or ideation or something. How do you know you are writing? I don't. So because that's the, without the cipher you have a consensus approach. That was a wonderful expression of burning man that I often use. That reality or the truth is what we all dream about together. That's a wonderful expression except it's useless because everything that we would like to define has to be grounded one way or another. I have to communicate that grounding to other cultures because other, no, your classic or any classification can happen only from a point of view from a classifier's point of view. Now we have, it can be classified in millions where it's, you know, you have a beard, you have short hairs and so on. That's really nice. So that kind of classification is useful and then somebody comes in a different framework and said, for sure. But then you could say, well Ben what do we do? Do we just need to laugh? I absolutely, I think that's why it's important to create a sort of record your own framework of interpretation. As long as we know that we are in a temporary particular mindset, then it's, then it's okay. This shouldn't bring us to time because you just mentioned that people don't have, didn't have the concept of very long time because human perception and animals perception is based on this cute rule that 10,000 years for me is the same as the million years. There is no way I can. When I was a boy, as a kid, I was obsessed by this issue. I just didn't understand how you could understand time. And my parents took me to the Grand Canyon. And I said, oh wow, I think I finally got it because this is this immense place. And it starts the bottom of the canyon. It's pre-cambrian rockets, goes back billions of years. And then it goes to the top. And then I realized the youngest rocks in the canyon were 200 billion years old. The stuff at the top. So there was even more. I just, I can't wrap my head around that. And I still think, even though we can date those rocks and even though we can recover these lost communities and so forth from eons ago, I still think we don't quite perceive what that means. We don't know what that means. As a young boy, was somebody like humans 200,000 years ago. We had a vague concept of space and time which meant that we are, nobody is in this universe. Just tiny little things. And there is this huge thing. Science approached it, well, space and time became scientific concepts as editing us when we started measuring them. So space was replaced with distance, time was replaced with duration, and then we came to an agreement with measuring instruments such as the rod and clocks. Without such externalization of brain function and a universal agreement on things, space and time is nothing. If you continue discussion, I will explain you that there is no space at no time. But, and indeed, once you started to look at those stratifications, those are concrete. Those could be looked at. And then you look at the physical process, or not you, but geologists have said, the evolution of this is this long, according to biometric, then you have an agreement. Well, while you know, looked at those rocks, and then it went down to a beach or a river, and it's, well, wait, I can see in these rocks these pebbles are streaming out. I can see these things forming. Now, let's see how long that takes. And it went out in the beach and nothing happened. You could sit there for a month. And then you saw a little bit of sand being deposited on a sandbag. And so he said, hey, this takes a huge amount of time to create what you see here in this rock record. Yeah, I want to go back to something Karen just said earlier, you challenged a little bit, and I'm just going to talk a little bit about how do you know, how could you confirm what you're seeing when you look at these archaeological things, and you said, well, it's true. A consensus gets built. And you tell your story, your account, the best you can, and then you wait to hear what sort of other colleagues and experts in the field think, and you slowly build it up. Okay, to me, that's what language is also to, isn't language a consent, or we think language itself forms as some sort of social thing. Everyone agrees that we're going to use the word red, whatever the original wrote, whatever the original red was, that we all kind of get into this consensus. And interestingly, that seems to give the semantics to meaning, right? So you can say, well, what you're doing right now seems to be a little in co-ed maybe, at worst. I don't think it is, but you know, it may be it'll come closer and closer as consensus, and it might go down the wrong path. The consensus may be this in a long direction, and that's just what you're dealing with. But I think there's something lost in that, because the next topic I'm interested in talking about is, well, is there anything lost in changing to the thinking of things being all a coed? Like, do you miss something? Because it's reductionistic to a degree, right? You know? You only miss tons of things, because again, we are human and landmen chauvinistic. But we can look at the same problems with a different direction. So semantics or explicit knowledge can be derived in all animals one particular way, which is my own experience. So one, I have one experience, I have another experience, another experience. And from those interactions or intersections of those experiences, something becomes explicit. That is the events are stripped off from this spatial temporal conditions, and it may become explicit. When I've seen a first dog in my life, I said, it's an episode, it's an experience. I see another dog and another dog, and then I created the explicit knowledge of darkness, and I know what it is. Now, this is fantastic. Humans with landage have another way of producing semantics, which is, ticks are given to you by an authoring, such as your parents, such as your teachers, and so on. They said, this is a USB. This is an iPhone. And I can use it because I was told about the utility of that thing, and it goes along for a long time, and I have no reason to go into it, even though I don't know what's in USB. I don't even know what USB stands for. I just know what this is. So humans can give, there's a little funnel here, and then pouring a lot of knowledge into the head of a newborn, a child, because we can do, and people who cannot generate episodes in their lives that are people without people can pull systems, they still can get around because they have this enormous freely given semantic information. The catch is this, because it's not your experience. You don't go through the verification process. You don't ground those things. And then I start believing that I'm a good Democrat because this is my framework. Or I'm a good Republican because this is my framework, and I never questioned my framework because that was given to me. I never questioned those words that were given to my teacher, my priest, or if I have one, or or authoricists. So that's an interesting thing, and that's why I say that when we split things to it's, or carve nature by its joints, and we are trying to go, this is the only time when you have to think about that seriously. Where everyday violence is not a big deal. You know, culture is not a big deal when we are classifying this and that, but when we are going to the roots of things, then this is the key to think about, and this is the key to think about it. Absolutely. It needed the approach for space and time as well. I'm going to go back with this issue of language because we have to get to exact term that he uses, but now I'm Trump's case, idea of other linguistics is totally different from what you're saying. It's not something that is taught to us, language is not taught to us, but language is somewhat inherent into the human being as a species. I'm afraid I can't. I mean, I hope I'm not talking about something that is totally alien to you. I thought you all thought you'd say. No, no, you just brought up a can of worms. It's going to go way longer than two hours. I should have not. Yeah, not a lot. I mean, happy to get into that, but maybe briefly. Really briefly? I mean, for me personally, in my own work, I sort of dismiss all of that. There are all forms of animal communication that have nothing to do with those roles. And then it becomes, for me, very, very arbitrary about what we call language friendly. I mean, the Consul Batcha Cup studies, have you ever read these things? These are fantastic. This is a spell he just retired, but anyway, he studies prairie dog communities in Arizona, and the different communities have different communities. To us, they just sound, they're 100 milliseconds, right? And so to us, they all sound the same. But if you simply record them and slow them down, you find out that they have different meanings. One of them will mean the coyotes coming from that direction. He even did experiments with graduate students wearing different color t-shirts, and they were able to assign a call to each of the colors that the graduate students used to. And they were able to distinguish one of the graduate students in a different way, even if she was shorter than all the other ones. Those useful graduate students. Yeah, yeah. And then he would do things like shoot a rifle. He'd shoot a rifle off on the side, and then they would develop a new vocabulary for that. So, yeah, no, it's fantastic. It's great work. Is it language? But in this case, wait, isn't that analysis based on looking at a stimulus and then the frequency of the response? Like, it's a little bit of a syntactical analysis, because you're talking about the formal aspects of those sounds. And that's exactly what we do when you try to decode a script that we don't know, right? I don't think it's inconsistent with, I'm not a Chomsky fan either, but I happen to think that's not inconsistent. You could say, well Chomsky would say, yes, but in humans, the way language forms, the formal aspects, syntactical aspects, have a certain form, and we can rely on that to do an analysis of the difference. So he would exclude that as a language, and I just frankly stay out there. Yeah, yeah. And use the word language, like when you're referring to prairie dogs or dolphin. He would use the language. Well, I would use communication, mostly because I don't want to get down that road of defining languages, because to me, okay, this is what I really think. I think that a lot of academics like to use languages a way to differentiate our species from all other species. Right. And so I just don't want it. I don't want to have to do it for them. I think it's a waste. For me personally, it's a waste of time. I don't think anybody has that. There are very few landmages that landmages completely human. Yeah, but no M does. He still says it now. No, you're he still says it now. I know, but then he has a lot of followers in different departments. It's like you were saying some, the what Vita, it's like if we were still arguing about getting the homunculus from the semen into the egg. I mean, it's just something I want to put aside. I agree this as a prominent person, but I think any linguist would agree that communication is a better, perhaps more general word and I can communicate with my dogs by cats and there's no question that we communicate or they communicate with each other. Do they have syntactic arrows? Yes, they have. Do they have the same land with Gs? And we know that birds have also some of the most complicated things like questions. The French dogs communicate differently than American dogs. Different language? So, let's say interesting thing that brings me back to my my, my, what says it funnel that we put a lot of stuff into our brains is because, interestingly, there is a big key for humans or big discrepancy between knowledge of humankind and the individuals share. My share of human Christ knowledge is extremely ridiculous. And it's getting worse and worse and worse obviously every day. Now dogs, they are not going to be very good today. Now dogs, from anywhere they have pretty much the same knowledge of the kind, anyway, in the world. Do they have cultural differences? There might be localities. Are there cultural inheritances in animals? Yes, there are. There are no monkey groups in Okinawa. These are rizous monkeys. They wash potatoes. And once that, that tradition is gone, then perhaps it's gone forever. There are many cultures that, like the Tasmanian cultures, like the Icelandic cultures and Greenland, that cultures, they all disappeared because the people who had the knowledge died and then they couldn't make new canoes. They didn't make arrows and things like that, all of a sudden, that civilization just disappeared because of the lack of this knowledge. I have to tell this story, mostly because it's amusing, and I want to move away from having this roundtable devolve into a talk about animal consciousness which we love to do here at Helix but we're good at. The story which may be a good segue is, there was a study about cats looking into whether cats understood their names. I think this is just a wonderful story. As opposed to other words, they might hear. So they do an MRI of the cat and they call the cat's name. And sure enough, the researchers found, yes, cats can distinguish their name from other words, spoken to them. They just don't care. Yeah, that's right. So, it's really funny, but it does say something about what then do you do? It's really, the cat's decoded tabby. It's decoded it. Some part of his brain, anyway, seems to evidence that it's been decoded. But then what does the cat do with that code? Is that creates a meaning for the cat, right? No, I love that story because they really don't give a damn and it's very interesting to me to be around people that are trying to decode, for instance, the SETI group, which you probably read about this, trying to decode the whale song by doing deep learning and the fellow running that says, well, we just need more data. That's all we need. And it's nonsense, frankly. I mean, God bless them for doing that and I'm glad somebody else is doing it. But Roger Payne, the fellow who discovered whale song, he tried to you know, he's done over 50 years of following the whales and interacting with them as well as we can. And he was trying to imagine what the conversation would be and the conversation would essentially be, okay, where's the food now? And I'm tired of smelt. Give me octopus. I'm tired of smelt. And that's the kind of, and this also reminded me of conversations with Oprah Chernofsky, who you probably know is a bird scientist. And he says, you know, he spent his life around these songbirds and he says, you know, they really think we are very slow. I mean, we can't possibly catch them, and we're very stupid. And the stuff that we worry about is just nonsense. And I think that's right. I think we're going to put a little bit... He's absolutely right. And you're right with yourself. In our field, COVID-19 neuroscience, neuroscience, we made this mistake all the time because of our inheritance. That is, we are giving the world to the brain. We are recording from the brain something, such as firing or fMRI singles, and then we find a relationship. And we think we are decoding the brain, and you have only been New York Times. The fact is that their message is message only for outside observers, because only the outside observer has the luxury of seeing the outside world and what's happening in the brain. Neurons in the brain have no clue. They don't know if there is anything outside. The only thing they have is the activity there. So what comes into the world, there has to be grounded. It has to be connected to something that something has. You have to have a second dominion. The only thing that's available for the brain, that is for us as humans, also is through our actions and our verification of things. Others, those are... Our things are verified independently. Everything is just a consensus. That doesn't really help us at all. So, you know, when it comes to communication, so brains work some... We use a lot of imagination, but that has to be looked at. And I can give you many, many examples that we have tons and tons of misunderstanding. Once you start recording from the brain and you ask whether those patterns that we thought were going to be authentic, these things, actually means something to the brain. If you don't have that grounding knowledge, you know nothing. Well, a good way to think about that would be, in this goes, returns to Shannon's discussions about information. You know, and he made a very strong effort to say, look, this is not information in the sense of like knowledge. It's not meaning. It's just how you get the code. There's a code for the information, right? And it's just imagine a signal comes across a wire or the airwaves and it's the word dog, right? Okay, dog. Now, that's wonderful. I heard it. It's the word dog. Now, why is it then, then, if I want, I can go to the library or I can think of myself. I can write an essay on dogs about all of my experiences and thoughts about dogs. I can write a poem. I can make a song. I can write a song about dogs, right? And so, and those individual expressions of mine will be, I hope, rich and elaborate. And it goes well beyond just the single word dog that the information came along, but it doesn't have the full richness of dogness for me, right? And I think that's an important... But it doesn't. It's just a few. Yeah. Because you represent... Right, but the code only provides a key to triggering that sort of, you're saying there's a context into which these codes find themselves and then the rest has to do with the way the humans respond to it. That's why I was saying earlier, if a illiterate looks at writing, especially I think back in the ancient times, it would have a very strong meaning to them, although it was not the explicit meaning that the code seemed to be trying to convey, right? So, back to the notion of the cipher, you know, to my mind, I think what ciphers are, they are the means of falsifying consensus. And there's so many classic examples of that. I mean, plate tectonics, everybody thought continents didn't move. And even though there was a concept for moving continents, it wasn't really... It didn't really falsify consensus until as examples of real science brought up here, paleomagnetic reversals, patterns on the ocean floor showed actually that the ocean seafloor was spreading and these continents moved. So that happened almost a century after the concept of continental drift. So the cipher, the key was paleomagnetics and it falsified what most scientists believed at the time. And the Russians still, some of the Russians still believe that continents still move, but it's an exceptional community. There are these paradigm shifts, okay? And we should, I mean, I think we shouldn't be too arrogant into believing that now we have found that. So, it was a century or next year, you will find some, you know, some other revelation that will create a different type of idea. I'm in a field with violent arguments about this because I keep encountering and in combat with, say, genomics people who say, now we have the true tree. We know exactly what was related to what. And I'm in a school or a group of people who say, we don't. We may never have the true tree. I'd be very much like in technology. She were describing. Have you read Integral Tree? No. This is exactly about the darkest tree and today's different branching and how you classified all ocean in different ways. It's an extraordinary good, you know, time vessel, this thing. It's still very good. I think one of the reasons I was interested in coding is I feel, in many ways, we were in this sort of paradigm of computers being the answer to everything we're going to apply, a computer model to understand every phenomenon we come across. And I thought, well, I'm interested in coding and I think it's not all a bad thing, but I feel there's some a little overreach. Well, isn't it because in medicine, it's everything's genetic. Oh, I wouldn't say that. But there's a lot that's genetic. Yeah, but then you see I have identical twins, which are except for T cell receptors and antibodies are genetically identical and they're obviously not identical. So now I wouldn't say that. And some of them develop, we have ones with plenty cases of somebody develops a disease and the identical twin never develops it. This is the biggest problem we have in neuroscience that we've got inbred that is identical twins and these are 50 to 100 generations. Yeah, so embarrassing that you take 10 animals and two of them are outliers all the time. Yeah, yeah, still. So yeah, I would say, okay, maybe sometimes people pretend that everything's genetic. But it is a paradigm. It's a powerful paradigm. Well, the discovery was so exciting. People are dead or you can identify genes. Oh, absolutely. I mean, there are plenty of you if you have the Tysock's gene, if you have sickle cell, you might develop the disease at different ages, but eventually you will develop the diseases. But there are plenty of others where you will never have. But like in paleontology that's the thing too now. Are you talking about genome? So we're all looking at these particular questions with a new lens that is say that we think enable us to create these genealogical trees and things like that. That might mean, in my understanding, the whole issue of human evolution has radically changed in whatever. The 80s or something like that? Yeah, well, and now, but there's still a lot of arguments even with all this new genetic information, genomic information. There's still a lot of arguments about the mobility of homo sapiens and the relationship to homo erectus and whether or not there was one exit from Africa or 25 exits or it's not a field that I'm really deeply involved in. But even with the arrival, and in the areas where I work, I work primarily in evolution. And there's still some big uncertainties and controversies in that area even with all this genomic information. Some of it's working extraordinarily unbelievably well. And as you can tell, I'm skeptical, but still the fact that you're saliva can find your second cousin in other countries is pretty astonishing. And the fact that Google Translate is doing so well, even though it kind of cheated in some ways in the way but it's working immensely well, right? You just said probably everybody's using it. I wanted to ask the neuroscientists here just say a few words about how you go about to the degree the word decoding applies to what you're doing. How do you go about it? Because you don't necessarily have a key. So we do have a key. At least I'd like to let me have a few. And the interesting thing you said, you're interested in mammalian evolution, so am I, but from a different aspect of you. Part of the most fascinating thing, but the brain for me is that in every memo what remains constant over the evolution time is timing. That is the brain reasons you might heard about alpha, beta, gamma oscillations and delta and so on. These are not only individual ones, but they form a hierarchical system in such a way that slow oscillations are modulating the amplitude of the faster ones and the phase of the faster one modulate the amplitude of the even faster ones. So it's like the tie is changing and then upon the changes the amplitude of the beta is changing. Now this is good because when you ask how come that you scale up a system 50,000 fold from the small brain to the size of the brain of a wave, what is the rule of this evolutionly scaling? What should remain constant and what remains constant is timing through this oscillation because they are preserved. It would take the turn 30 seconds. Why is that? Because this is what they call the neural syntax. This is the time packages which allow that you said information if you want those piking activity from one area of the brain to another area of the brain because the other area of the brain is already given the cipher which is the time window. If you don't have that framework, this neural syntax, then brain areas cannot communicate with each other. We cannot communicate with each other. The reason why you understand me is because even though I have an accent and I have made so many mistakes is because I have a particular tempo which is about 4 Hertz which is characteristic of every single human language which is also not only the utterances but also the perception. And the reason for that is because both the utterances as well as the perception of these events are based on brain rhythms. So again we have to go inside and train in order to have the grounding and that's the grounding for me the grounding of the origin of language and classification and cipher. How much of this formal appreciation of these constant relationships? How much of it is a purely sort of mathematical 1 over F distribution? How much is it divergent that? Does that help you? Because if it's very generic, it's very simple. It's not only generic, but you already know the content of these patterns. And if something is short it means that in a system which has constraints on the speed of communication, the brain is a very slow system. You know the conduction velocities of the neurons is on the order of 0.2 to several meters per second. Very, very slow. So given that if you have a short amount of time available it means that only your immediate partners can be involved. That is short means small number of neurons. More time means larger number of neurons. And then the cool goal of this communication is that whatever happens locally can be broadcasted globally as well as the global brain state. You know what the activity pattern in the brain is constraints how local communication or local cipher can be generated. If you take away the cipher, if you take away the voltage, if you take away all of these brain latins, the end of the day is that every single psychiatric disease is associated with one or other type of timing problems. It's difficult to differentiate diseases from each other because those are all arbitrary. But it's very easy to look at the brain even at a depressed patient with its depressed state or non-depressed state that is very different. So the timing, the communication is absolutely matters and that's what I'm pushing for that we have a sittactical system. I'm thinking as a very general level this idea of extracting some understanding of meaning from either brain activity or artifact assumes a certain sort of background either it could be in the various mathematical descriptions of it. It could be noise. It could be a 1 over F frequency. These are background mathematically defined substrate and we think we find meaning when something diverges from that, something you give a stimulus is no longer it doesn't have that baseline anymore. That's a way of building a key. Isn't that in a way when you don't have the literal, you set it up so you're right but then there is a deviation. This is when many brain structures kick in and it happens to what's called phase receptor and all of a sudden the timing changes and that timing change is detected elsewhere. If that is not detected as happens in schizophrenia and then other diseases that's a big problem. Okay, great. Wow. Time went fast. All right. I guess the question is do we have any folks want to ask questions of our panel? Thank you. Thank you all so much. Sorry everyone is sitting down so I'm going to sit down too. Hi everyone thank you that was really fascinating. My name is Celia Emery. I'm a museum architect and my concern relates to I guess for the politics of coding, the psychology of coding and where agency fits in. So in museum design we have two aspects of time space. One of them is the path of the visitor in the spaces of the institution and people enter into a building with a pre-existing idea of how they're going to use it because they're adults, they're free agents and they've already learned how to use buildings. So on museum institutions set up what that time space experience is going to be and yet there's a conflict, there's a schism within any use of any building which is that we as individual agents want to be able to act in our own way we want to be able to affirm. So your reference to the graffiti was so interesting I'm about to go to Alula to visit the Hegra tombs and there's a lot of graffiti we'll talk. But apparently it was speculated that that graffiti was just journeyers writing down that they had arrived, in other words I am here, Joe was here and in fact that isn't, that is what much of the graffiti is. So that kind of need for us to kind of the ego to kind of exist somewhere and market somehow within a coding system. So the other schism that we have is that in a museum you have a relationship between a person and that artifact which was created in a different point of time. So it's in a different space, it's in a different time. So how do we, so there's two different aspects of this, I'm going to get to this point. In epigraphic and cuneiform the who was control, my question for the group is really who has the control of these forms of ideology? Who is creating, who is benefiting from the cuneiform methods, why? And who was benefiting from written language and why? How come that didn't continue to exist? And then how do we as individual agents kind of fit in? Like aren't we, are we just obeying the ideological precepts that have been handed down to us? Or do we have any agency within coding? Sorry, can we do so long? Well let me start with the specific question of who benefited from cuneiform. You can have a very materialistic interpretation and that's the usual interpretation. It's a way of dealing with a more complex system of especially economic interaction, therefore you need some type of record keeping that goes beyond time and space that can travel from one place to another place or is kept for a specific period of time. To take it to this greater level of, you know, when the writing system, what the writing system has a meaning beyond a purely practical writing system. Well, I wouldn't call it an ideology, it's a philosophy, it's an approach to reality. It's an attempt at understanding reality that yes, is shared by an intellectual elite just as today philosophical discourse is shared by intellectual elite but it frames a cultural you know, it creates a cultural setting that yes, the entire civilization if you can use that term, you know, is part of even a lot of the majority of people are not consciously aware of the elements of this. I'd just like to say that, you know, one of the roles I have at the museum and I still have is I have oversight of exhibition. So I really understand what you're saying about what the visitor how does the visitor engage or how does the museum engage with the visitor and the question you have and who has agency there and there's always so the trend in recent years of course has been interactivity, interactivity, interactivity and they're generally many of them are experiments that fail because you make assumptions about what visitors really want and the problem is that's based on you European, you're not the visitor, you know, and it's fascinating just to think about what's happening in a museum, what happens when a visitor encounters an artifact or a fossil or a piece of tapestry or whatever in that sense. Well I think there are just many interesting questions that you raise and I'm very jealous of your that's true. I hope you'll open the university case. But that said, I think it seems you're a dependent in terms of proof benefits because it has to do with how communication works in individual societies and today in a global society working literally in code benefits very different people than at least geographically. It's sort of a more sense of something much more diffuse than when you're talking about individual ancient societies or medieval societies where certain practitioners were sort of deputized of being the record keepers and they could derive status from their roles as such or proximity to different ranges of literacy would allow people to sort of pen themselves accordingly in that order of status or esteem. And to go back to a point that you made earlier, I mean this is why we literally have tons of whether we call them magical texts or texts of ritual power a lot of times they're total gibberish. At least us they seem to be and they don't seem to accord with any particular script that we know of because it seemed like it resembled writing to people who couldn't write they wouldn't know the difference. And so there's a power to that and sometimes it was just something esoteric deliberately esoteric but I think the ways in which we relate to sort of dominant types of communication allows us to sort of fit into broader constructs of status, cultural economic and otherwise. But I think it's really sort of culture dependent I think when we talk about antiquity again it's very different from today when we talk about code and coding and who's benefiting from their ability to be able to work with certain languages on computers it's you know many more people than 20 years ago but who are those people right and how do they use that information it's something that I can't possibly triangulate that others might but I think it's definitely indicative it's a symptom of something that's shifting in our global society that I can't interpret but because it's something sort of different it'll be interesting to see work. The key phrase you have is relate. I think that's the most important thing in the museum and I'm looking for creations that allow me to go to a place and I lose my sense of time. All of a sudden I can devote my entire mind to what's going on there. Once I do that I all of a sudden have first point of view rather than a third person, first person point of view rather than the third person point of view of everything. Now you ask about the agency that I become an agent because somehow you transform me and I will be part of the participants of those events even though I had no knowledge about that if continents go together. But I use my imagination, I use my existing knowledge, I use my existing belief systems to relate myself to that situation. Now the agency is not human every animal has the desire and everything to learn these boundaries we know that we have boundaries and that's the essence of even a mobile or every single creature that knows that it has boundaries and relates into everything else. That relatedness is the super important thing. If I go to a museum where I have to interact, this is what kids when they go to New Jersey, the science museum I see, it's the same thing as a physics class. Plus maybe they can do more freely and the teacher is not watching. This is a fascinating thing because yes we are always saying the museum is important, it was important to reopen after COVID because this is a place, this is it gives people a sense of place but what's really interesting is for a lot of people this is their place this is there and increasingly and there might be a dichotomy in society maybe that will break down as people die and younger and younger people come up but you can see it in a daughter or somebody close to you that you know intimately what their reality is compared to what you're trying to do with visitors coming to a museum. So two examples that work for me very well, of course it requires the relatedness, the Japanese shinto goddess. It's simple but you lose the sense of the time immediately because you are just looking at the rock. The other one is an extreme other thing that Selena also knows about, you know, a marine abramovich when she was sitting in the over there there was nothing there except a pair of eyes and you were looking to see yourself in those eyes and all of a sudden you had a means of saying you can discover yourself if your museums spaces can create that thing that discover yourself you leave the museum with a better feeling or recreation then there's the look. The institution is really because the organization has telling you what's in the information. Exactly, they want to convey information. I don't need information, I have enough. My own personal experience which is taken for what is worth I'm not a I have nothing to do with PCMs except as a museum goer but you know a lot of what makes science interesting are controversies and challenges within a paradigm and the challenges within a paradigm can be small and they can be in the verge of some cataclysmic change and that's really I think interesting to people I would think it's interesting to people. I think it's a mistake to use the word controversy for a devol. I would stay away from that word because I think it makes people think well there are experts and you're already distance from it. There are experts and the word controversy personally for myself sort of is off putting it makes it seem like this is a little bit good to be beyond me. I think it's really useful to say here that just lay out the different ideas side by side and don't refer to it as being some raging controversy among experts. I just want to express appreciation for everyone who does this work and it partly relates to fun. I found and this is also relating to what you asked before is there a difference to humans between something that's a million years ago or 10,000 years ago and I find that with my students anything that happened before the year 2012 is ancient history. The time is completely compressed and obviously my students are not as they're not working in the same capacity if you were to look with graduate students in your field or you with yours or you with yours because they're already very much aware of the stretch of time. But to me the ways that museums have the capacity to jar people from the present reality and to force them to confront chronology and time whether it's I feel like it's activist work these days and the power of losing yourself in those places being jarred from your phone. It's different when you're talking about academics or researchers or specialists in the general public. I think it's one of the only places where we can remind people that there's a world beyond themselves chronologically, culturally and beyond the human realm too and I think it's that is what I feel like is increasingly lost in the world of coding and it's just such important work. So anyway you can make people uncomfortable enough to be present in their spaces and learn is a contribution to everybody. Do you take your students in the field? Do you notice the difference? Absolutely I am so extraordinary now. I teach in a history department so not all my students expect to specialize in anything that relates to antiquity but I tell them that I think the tradition about museums is that you know it's from European tradition these are places to appreciate art and being able to appreciate it in a particular way. It's a status thing, it's an appreciation thing so I tell them these are libraries they're like visual libraries in a way not like not that that's such a great advertisement for them either but rather than being something flat and two dimensional it's something you get to enter and immerse yourself into and when it's really effective I remember because I teach in Brooklyn, I teach in Flatbush and some of my students have never been to the Met and I remember the first time when I started teaching Maron I brought a class in the Met and I remember the student who looked up the grand staircase and he just was like well you know because it's just a different environment, a different world and when you don't approach it as art but you know objects that are artifacts that can teach us about different places in times that these you know that they can investigate it's totally transformative and it's something that a lot of people take for granted in lots of different places but I think it's again like a form of activism to remind people they're not the center of the universe and their phones are not the center of the universe but the world is not flat so sorry that's the thank you. Is there another question? As I hear everyone talking about decoding it seems to me that there's a little bit of sort of an incompatibility of some fundamental assumptions that especially as I hear this coming out in the debate about consensus so it seems to me that there are kind of two different approaches here to what decoding actually is so I've kind of like set out a number of binaries here trying to make sense of this for myself seems on the one hand there's a sort of approach to denotation and on the other an approach to connotation as it pertains to decoding meaning. You know you could say that there's a kind of idea here of this context or I guess thinking about what you were saying about the brain in a sense that there's a synchrony you called that synchrony a key but I don't think that that's a key to meaning that's just a condition of possibility for interpretation of meaning. So I guess I'm wondering in this discussion of coding one whether you all would agree that there are two different approaches to thinking about what meaning is and whether that's a disciplinary problem or something else. You ask an easy question please. So you said synchrony is not exactly the same as brain waves but nevertheless I didn't make a claim and nobody does that we can decide for the content that say it's a you know grandma has a large way of defining things but one of them is you could call it the phonetics of that and that's without content so that's what brain it was about. Now the meaning is the essential thing of everything unless my students show me that that relationship between what the experiment that proposed to the brain and the responses there has a message for the rest of the brain or to the animal that's not there is no meaning. So meaning has to be generated only through utility at least this is what the view in evolution as well as in the animal world is that if particular thing comes with a plus or minus in the life of the animal that generates meaning. So many ways the way how today's neuroscience is studied we think that it's a like slate and then you just shovel information into this your brain and so on and you can with which means that the complexity of the brain whatever we do is growing as you learn more and more and more and that's exactly what happens in an AI system and it collapses very soon because there are so much stuff interfering with each other. Another way of thinking about this is that brain comes already with an equipped dictionary. Every single thing that exists in your future life is already there and the parents that we thought were generated in over in fact they pre-exist. So what happens is that out of this realm of possibilities you experience something that goes in one way or another positive or negative and that pattern that was present at the time when that experience happened becomes meaningful. It will have a utility for now or the future of the organism this is how we generate meaning. Now the linguist or a human person who thinks about may have another way of phrasing it but I think that would be just rephrasing the same kind of thing. I'm going to drive you guys both of you crazy. I mean to me I'm not sure what meaning means here but there are I mean if it means something as simple as you know when I talk about brain rhythms I mean if I if you stimulate a synaptic input to a muscle fiber that muscle fiber will twitch and if you do it over here there's a couple of extra steps but no this muscle will twitch and if you go over here this muscle will twitch and if you just go a few you know bottom millimeter on the other side you will hear something or you will feel something and in a particular part of your body. Is that meaning? Because if it is then it's based in okay so rise it not meaning because it has no relation to experience but what if what it's remapping? So I'm going to press you on that it can change so we can we can remap this to hear instead of there and this happens all the time when people have strokes for instance. Now is it meaning? I would say it would be meaningful in the context that we understand how I think we have to finish up. I always want both of you but here it becomes so there are things that are not there but when you have a stroke it becomes a meaning so when you touch your nose with your toe it feels it has a meaning for you because it feels at the same now that meaning is acquired through experience and because you feel at the same time I can show you that anybody can show you that it's not at the same time it's a much longer time to go from here or from my nose but that for me as a utility I don't care about the mechanism I just know it's at the same time so that's a meaning for me because I can use that information anything that I can use utility determines meaning That's a really unsatisfying discussion right yeah that meaning is the most difficult thing. Yeah we have to move on right it's interesting it's an interesting question. So I've learned so much this morning and I'm very grateful and it has led to many different questions but I'm just going to bring it down to one. I wonder what happens in terms of when emotion enters what happens to how people approach things and I'm thinking now at the Morgan Museum right now there's an exhibit on Erduana I'm sure you've already seen it you've probably been talking to Sydney Bactog about it or but it goes from agriculture being discussed in terms of bushels which you were mentioning versus handling of harvest through this highly emotive charged poem by this priestess about plow my fields plow my fields as an erotic situation so I'd love to know what happens in terms of the evolution of mind that brings that in or the world where we are a man in his bassel in Egypt you know where that's a whole other very highly emotive interaction. So are you asking within the context I mean the fact that it becomes something that it's written down? No that you can approach the harvest through the number of bushels or you can approach the harvest as a kind of analogy of becoming together of sky and earth, male and female what happens what's happened in the mind that opens it up to that kind of approach. Well, metaphorical language I don't know if that's, I assume it predates writing, metaphorical language where we connect something physical let's say that's physical in one area of life and metaphorically we connect it to another area of life I would imagine that that pre-dates the origins of writing one of the great things about poems like the American Epics is rich, it is with metaphorical language and what I find interesting about metaphorical language you mentioned in the Ishidwana poem is or metaphor or metaphors are contained within a cultural structure in order to make sense so abundance of fields makes sense in a particular type of society actually I discussed metaphorical language with my students only a couple of days ago living in New York City they have no connection at all to the metaphors that are being used in ancient poetry because they're mostly rural metaphors and so but I do that I think is yeah there is a system there of clothing as well you have to understand you have to understand the cipher you have to understand the system if I compare something to an object, an entity, a natural phenomenon that none of you have ever experienced you're not going to understand my metaphor but just also in terms of image making or expression and emotion I think that's more what I'm wondering about especially now with all the talk about emotion and cognition and what the interaction is between them and I just thought how do you express emotions? How do you render emotion orally or in a written form? You can only do so I think by using comparison, I mean love is a feeling of whatever fire etc etc. I think we're also going to have the opportunity to reflect on some of this issue in her fiction, fiction, meta-fiction talk later today because I think really for me the answer and response in part to what you were asking is that there's a dialectic that goes back and forth between metaphorical poetic sort of meaning, phenomenological meaning and then the way it gets encoded and then the codes create the opportunity for more engagement with meaning because the codes themselves can have meaning so I think it's a very interesting dialectic did you ever know? Oh sorry Hi, please. Hi. This last question sort of prompts me to rise. I have this thought I've been developing for a long time and it seems to coordinate with a lot of the different themes that we've had this morning Prior to the development of language there was a great deal of intelligence in early humans they survived and so the way. The thought just to make it very general is that the evolutionary pressure which leads eventually to the most powerful evolutionary movement which is the development of culture really requires the development of language because we have to express to larger groups over time over generational time the development of language seems to be a cognitive way of thinking which is pairs of opposites which is as you say positive or negative and so on. The metaphorical thinking is not it's more analog the earliest need for language I want to suggest or I think is the communication of what we would call mythic kinds of ideas it is what forms a group it's what gives self-identity to the group and the evolutionary pressure is in the direction of groups that are more tightly bound more coherent those are the successful ones. So how does that happen? Evolutionarily the thought that I have and I don't have your expertise to know whether it makes sense to you which is why I guess I am saying this is that we develop a the brain develops a sensitivity to certain kinds of narrative that we think of as mythic we recognize mythic ideas mythic narrative in a different way it's not about the content there is something that we feel is mythic which would require a physiological development evolutionarily based in the brain and so we end up with two kinds of minds a cognitive which is all linguistics are cognitive and the same intelligence that we had before we developed language and those two different minds are not being commensurate they cannot communicate with each other you can't be thinking about metaphor in a cognitive way and understand the power and if you try to translate it into cognitive forms you lose the power and so we have these two different minds just as a further development of that is the notion that that which can communicate is myth mythic stories mythic ways of thinking is what gives us a sense of wholeness where we can see the world with the two incommentral intelligences anyone? We were talking downstairs over coffee before a little bit about people have written books that are very similar to what you're saying and I guess you had Peter Pessick here with the polyphonic minds idea so you might want to check out his book he kind of thinks the way that you do and we were also talking about the bicameral mind which is very out of fashion but you know that book? Yeah so it's very similar to what exactly it's very very similar to what you're bringing up. Now I'm very skeptical of both of them and I'm friendly with Peter but still I'm very skeptical I think they take a lot of impressionist to kind of stuff and try to come up with the whole theory but and just like I'm being a little skeptical of what you said but that doesn't mean you don't have a lot of depth there and that there's a lot to examine so we were talking about kind of the variation of what you were saying just before we started the meeting this morning. I take these two sides that you're describing as being a non-incomensurate or at least they may be different but they're different ways of looking at the same thing where they're on a developmental historically on a developmental course and I think I mean the person that comes to mind for me is Ernst Kasier who wrote a lot about mythic way of looking at the world and has it became more rationalizing scientific not to say that's always better which is what people sometimes lament but that it's a further development of mythic thinking. I think you're saying there are two parts of the mind one of them is more modern and it can't exactly coexist simultaneously with the other part. I think we have them both at the same time. Our problem today is our inability to see them both at the same time to experience them both at the same time. Myth functions by just it doesn't describe it is a place from which you can experience both ways of experiencing the world or seeing the world and responding to it at the same time and gives us a sense of home. Myth becomes religion at a certain point. To me, myth plus politics equals religion. I really had hoped in fact that's a very we have to finish and that's an interesting end note because no it really was my hope that that this would be just sort of two-sided this decoding and demeaning connotation and denotation is something I was hoping we would be able to bring out here and I think we did a really pretty good job. I thank you all for your contributions. Thank you. Can I make a little correction? So I kept wondering if we could have this conversation two-thousand years ago and many of the things that we discussed here were discussed two-thousand years ago in the exact same way and your answer about myth and so on was unanswered the same way. So now it's impossible but I think if you look at the grounding that is how you can make a judgment that there are two brains as you said, emotional and cognitive brains and this has been going on in humankind for a long time before DSM-5, DSM-4 actually had two axes and one set of psychiatrists that with the cognitive problems that have been with the emotional problems, now we know there is no part of the brain that would be dedicated to emotions. We know also there is no such a thing as fear center because negative and positive is the luck, context, the stomach, the heart, wherever something bad is called it next to it or just to it is the good. This is how the relationships are formed and that is just to show there is no part in the brain that you can look at. MRI is just like we can distinguish and separate cognition from emotion. They evolve together. They are never separate. They have the beliefs that we can separate them and those beliefs can persevere and no amount of introspection can help. That's why I throw it back. But if you look into the brain the debate will become simpler. There are times where you have an emotion and you have no cognition onto you actually. Absolutely. How do you have a condition without a motion? No. Okay. So if I can't have a reaction to something just through emotions, yes you can. So that I call adaptive behavior and you can call it cognition. So if I avoid something because it's unpleasant that's a adaptive behavior and that's the definition of cognitive action also. Now I'm going to have an out-p to go. You say hotel, motel, town? you