 Welcome to this first of the poetry and music series. I'm Ed Nursecien, director of the center. David Pollens, who is in charge of the poetry program for the Helix Center will introduce today's program. And maybe he'll tell you something about what else he has planned. I don't know. He hasn't given me his copy of his comments. As I said yesterday, we are having a benefit at the end of the month. But those of you who can't come, any donation of any size is welcome. So with that, David. Thanks. Thanks, Ed. Well, as Ed mentioned, this is the first of our poetry events at Helix. And I'm David Pollens. And we have a committee of people who have been helping and providing suggestions. I'll mention their names. Heather Dubna, Rachel Haddis, Anne Rieleveen, and Polly Rosenweg are all in the poetry committee. And are all helping to organize the events. We're hoping to have three, possibly four more events between now and the summer. The next thing that'll be coming up in the winter is going to be a roundtable on classical Urdu poetry and Galib. And then a little bit later on in the spring, we're going to have a roundtable on ancient Mayan poetry in the Popul vote. And there are some other roundtables in the works. And we'll let you know about them as they develop. So we have two very special artists, and with us today, Sean Singer, who won the Yell Younger Poets Prize and the Norma Farber Award from the Poetry Society of America for a first book of poems. And Lewis Porter, a wonderful, wonderful jazz musician and preeminent jazz musicologist. Did you bring CDs with you today? Or? No? I have certain that car. OK, well, the Coltrane Biographies. I can go. I can go get it. OK, the Coltrane Biography is on sale outside. And so is Sean Singer's book of poems. So if you're interested, please, please buy them. So I'll segue poetically to their collaboration today. I wonder if they'll help us to answer a question posed by Sean in his poem inside the Keith Jarrett Trio. He asks, how does a hollow bone in your head trace clear purple wavelets from waves of pain? So we're going to go for about an hour and 15 minutes. And we'll stop, and we'll have participation, questions, comments from the audience. Thank you very much. OK, thanks for coming. Nice to see you. Shall we just start? The old record rolled out of the hot machine, the scully automated lathe covered in oil. Rigged to the metal ends, dying of spin, metal on black, back to back thimbleweights, diamond and rinse to a new shine, lunge and pull into circles, 100 grooves to the centimeter, calling it vinyl midnight candle, drops onto the place with the push of the night gift-figous turping needle, a bell-crank lead plant resting in a red scissor over the lumps of steel, then rising with rustle smoke, jazz dust, rumbly with the blues, the old rumor monger taking us to the juke, the bambara word that is wicked. Douncing resin polymer, lost to the racy's stuff. Baby, she got a phonograph. Won't say alone some word. Would evil have I done? Would evil as the poor girl heard? Louderford. OK. OK. That's fine. I should yell. Nice to yell. OK. OK. OK. Photo of Coltrane, 1963. Otherworldly and outreaching, a pernastis of noise with the serious clint of anestimal worry on his face. O Coltrane, what will rank for your pious gleaming and trillion euphonia? So capable, swift with no trace, no trace of stillness. The blur of the gray, gray, and gree-gree flows onward to the black bell of the saxophone, with cylinder of joy, and in purple sea of heaven, ebbing into hell. OK. I'll try to do that. It's a small place here. OK. You can maybe even not be able to find the view. I should use the natural value of the piano. That would be very good. Oh, you don't want to hit it? Yeah. I said, Janie. Can you put your picture for every being I know? It's a piece of light. OK. Sound check before the next poem. You need to see this clearer? OK. I'll do it with me. OK. Billie later. Boons etch themselves above and below, drink sober lungfuls of hush. Blood soap and well, the threadbare noises of an amber tube and a bird. Welcome to the district of snow loneliness. My list. A towel for redness, taboos for my dolls, spasms of a man, something emerges from a cord, a pigeon egg, a snow-silent, resilient secret, holding its hand toward you, holding its pink spotlight, finding a Roosevelt dime. I wake up to a new sun, a clear and tender quiet in each bone. Billie blew his momma's chinaberry tree, angry since the big being card, and not in the early black, back of the club so thick with smoke, and lady up front blowing blues till my hair hurts, spurts of shying some tiny trouble you know. In the black fracture of night, she's back, hopped on cutie killer, diller faced like a brown egg, begging the black like Jack the bear. Their lady baby, color of a chocolate dress, juicy Lucy the Shazam, do a bank bang outflose, as she called yes. I had too many husbands. Last one beat me black and blue, and he was out the door, he said, baby better me than you. I got good in trunk, I couldn't even see. No matter how much money I make, I've never been free. He used to stay out late, now he don't come home at all. I know by that there's another mule kicking in my stall. If you don't like my ocean, don't fish in my sea, stay out of my valley and let my mountain be. Let me be your rag doll until you're trying to come. If you beat me, ragged, I've got to beat you some. If he walks out the door, he won't be gone long. I'll be up on the stage in my needle of song. I'll be up on the stage in my song. I'll be up on the stage in my song. Scott Joplin. Son of a slave, your birthday is no more exact than a petal. Sunflower, you have no need to worry. Your piano rolls have played in middle and upper class homes. Maple leaf, across the plains, where is gold, we worry. Neither improvise nor play blues, but compose. Chrysanthemum, our ways of living differ, like worry. The weaponized and visible boundaries of America keep you. Eugenia, there is a reason to worry. You were composing, but not recording, only rolls with holes. Lily Queen, others have been pieces of worry. The reason you asked and the reason I don't have the answer is the same. Heliotrope, let's just not worry. Sifliss with his attendant dementia, paranoia, paralysis, pineapple, your leaves each fear and heave toward worry. From bone magic, the exeigencies of an interval, Igor Stravinsky. Ory's gooey nasty bone style with its slurs, gloss and muskrette does reveals a muskrette in Aquatic Rodin and its fur all Louisiana industry before worry relocated to Los Angeles. Thoreau described their nests not as things, but as dwellings, the border of Habitat and town. The theme beneath the soly on dropping shocks, with corn shocks and their outside maze used for toilet paper. Lil' Hardin's feelings were avenged during their divorce, dropping them on Louis' head. The raw umbrella, a bone facing backwards on a horse-drawn cart when the sun sets there is not to do. I saw you with your sweet man last night and I know you wasn't true. Just for you, low powdered color through a straw. From the cave's vantage, feel the trestles and palms. Be the flash lab, see a ball slow above the plate. Be the flesh lab too, the cream of your neck, the portion near the ear. Use your stylus, have no direct hand contact. Recall that utopia literally means not a place. Punishment, right, I will not write this poem a thousand times in a wall. Then hinge that wall or singe it. I think of Maxine sometimes, her inky bob, Ramones tea and negative definitions. We would ride her blue Toyota behind the dunes. Clear cell cancer killed her years ago. She would take my hand in the mid-grade mall and we saw our liquid happiness rising through bodies. Mountainous black garden. What good is intelligence if you cannot discover a useful melancholy? Reading grapefruit, pray and fake grief. Put on floret african and her arm drapes onto steel fibers along nerves. Her love fills the zinc bottle of its own body. Peel me a woody base, wick the piano away from the sweet peak of Duke's pumade. Black can be quiet and contain the whole thing. What is a part, what is a part and not hard and hard and not a part? Welding Irvine, 1943 to 2002. Please forgive the long silence. In my gut, which is the blue flame of the stovetop, the broken lands of fear quakes my liver and my name means not celebration and critique, but concealment with the dogon called Obea. And so I take myself into myself, that long ribbon folded inside the cowry shell. I'm a massive animal. The torsion in the muscles of my neck serve up the image of a malcontented demon. And I suck my own grave through my sinuous mantle groove. First, tar's vinegar warmth euphoria nodding off, followed by automat cheeseburgers in vanilla milkshake. The only black kid in the school picture far away swim look in the thread of his eye. Japanese love cool struttin, white legs, black A-line fifth avenue. As demons douse metallic nodules, a stylus pins, cold porter and a Pullman quarter. What seems like a right hand with blue tabula is actually sunny Clark, waking up from his vomit when he sees what he's leaving behind. Only the right cord is perfect labor. Everything with sunny Clark is weakness. He's a city and a forest in folded quill. Tranquilize with the black lung and tar black the most aristocratic color of all. Ten burns. There's no such thing as bot music but there's such a thing as progress, Coleman Hawkins. Although jazzes sepia acetates and lacquers have dipped the black into silver nitrate and are faded little faders, they inflate like lungs. The pink lung with its tortoise shell shellac appears to bulge and its inseam exhales purity and inhales spoonfuls of tempo. Purity and jazz sir is thwarted and unutilized. Two hundred years of minstrel snapping their red suspenders corrode and oxidize the air. Mr. Tambo, what kind of a girl was she? Zip, she was highly polished, yes indeed, her father was a varnish maker. You see that rubber pork chop became something. It's supposed to be funny, by the way. Bishay shimmy shawable from its mold has been heated and mounted face to face with a hinge so that the machine opens up facing you. It is not lighter or inter-metso frozen like trout beneath the flux and ratamacuing of ice. It is not alpine. Aing and schlaff and olf der lauer, oben east der alte ritter. Through the cracked photos breaking into creosote, superlatives doused the monoliths, virtuoso, genius. But there is a siphoning off of licking pink jam from the knife. Negativities, the integrated bands, for example, of alcoholics, benzedrin, heads, and junkies, or the deranged catastrophe of buddy-bold and feeding his hand to a ceiling fan, or the wicks saturated with amphetamines, or buddy-rich telling the trumpet section of fuck faces and plink them every seven bars like a neutered werewolf. When Coleman Hawkins stood half nude like a mango and Friedlander's photo, 1956, with his curved man-breast sweating from it may not be true, he appears modern. He is not a man-cane nostalgic item logistical. He, lung of air-rate, propulsive tub, urgently pumping 9ths, is the living demonic fuse ripping through a blanket of vanilla radio. Racial animus and tractable sources, faded scriptures, the pinstripes of the story-ville mudheads, midwives, and the peach tin types fitted into ladies' brooches are not jazz. This strategy does not puff the uvula's blowpipe or bring an axe to the vanguard. Rather, it's shuffle-bucks, pantomimes, and dab slop with a hanky. Meanwhile, as the onyx rattlesnake of the century slid by 1960, the year the fedora went up the flu, jazz, too, opened like a fire in a woman's ceremony. It did not end. Euler had yet to drag the black river into rivulets of need. Unkempt skinny dips, red vinyl seats of the southern buses, and the vinegar cloud of the tree's harpsichords were made too of a jazz. As the bus ate the road's tape measure, the ballrooms closed, the hickory house sewed 52nd street into a fly-trap enmeshed with liquid static. The green river you ignore is realized by the black river, growing wings beneath the shoulder blades of the hatchling. Coleman Hawkins, who morphs with allular quills into a hawk. Dark, pitagile marks on underwings, present on all ages and races, conjured shadows beyond the last section of the long film. You're afraid of listening to this lady? He, too, with parade-flowed head, eyes like flashing Lindyhoppers, lunging with the lumpy fabric of the past, pushing a gauge, a deuce of blips, blood stream lushes of vipers more righteous than scumpthein codification. In closing, sir, the reed was always remoisted while you were in the booth, cutting the montage sequence, but the pink sequence of Bessie Smith quenched with yielding limelight to disappear to dust like eighth notes. My buttony jacks and the tongue spits out the disc's rainbow. Empowered cadaver at Lewis Porter. Absolutely. He who travels learns, Rome a proder. Django means I awake. This verdon wheels its wood spokes through scrollwork indigos, and a transparent red stove glows by the blanket when a horse clops to the center of the moon, where Belgium is born, the Manusch, the Mecc King Jones. To wake up in a caravan with a plower viola, canvas-covered hatch means to exist. But if we exist at the frontier robbing chickens perhaps, flirting with the viola, violet, or draca grape and sloshing around in purple liquid. A hedgehog has barbed arter-chokes skin and hides under its anointed bush. Stuff him with rosemary time and wild garlic over a roasting pit through the clay, with lacho robin and a savory liver. To awake to see the window and the horse-drawn air, to awake to the dark muzet and the purple vaults. A hedgehog winds his piston by the chimney, and gripelli and Reinhardt screaming fragrant honey under the sky's purple canvas. The sound gets to be part of your body. Lester Young sleeping with his horns when Billy wasn't there. Black faucet, black suede, Django Reinhardt, the guitar superman. His black moustaches sip the milk foam. No one listening to him turn a girl into a puddle has ever complained. Look to the side and he'll be there. Disassembled parts of the base clarinet. One. Aerophone, over-blow. Grenadilla, cylindrical boar, sassafrass, Contra-based, orange tiger roar. Harry, Carney, half-hole, Bitch's brew, resin, cousin, Mary, Eric, Dolphy, grapefruit stew, Rosen. Neither a dry sound or the white rice paper mask, but swallowing the moon, the notes drink like grapes. The Newark photographer says that when he was a kid, there were 12 or 13 movie theaters downtown. Now only a tiny porn theater, a spits distance from the museum shows octaves of skin. Part of the lip stretches behind the knee, smooth as a mercury reissue, and the precipice glistening like a roll glaze has been pushed up and down across the surface of the surface. The dough gone where purple fringes and their pearl millets sing vessels of donkeys bearing caratatives. Like the sandstone, bendigara, all rectilinear with masks secured by the teeth. Four flutes roll off their center. The cakes filling plastered, not a sigh exactly longer, but a piece of barbecued peaches. White and red altars catch clouds. As that with Braxton means, I shook hands with elven Jones and with Lawrence D. Butch Morris, the cavernous filaments of the downtown room like a limb soaking in a barrel. An article said, the amount of female granaries is an indication for the amount of women living in Guinea. As nougat-like pomade yelled, the girl can't help it. Coltrane likewise said whatever he'd say about Eric Dolfi would be understatement. Newerks dry rot and magnesium flares show litter and the bare branches of a maple. Some looters return with armfuls of candy, coolade, and water guns. The late photo of Saravon shows black triangles arranged like Batman villainous. Years ago, her carefree loafers and red Parisian mime stripes swung easy. The liner notes reveal that she could have succeeded in the classical field. Wayne Shorter would say, what's happening? And she'd say Newark, and that was enough because you know what Newark does to people. Mel Torme reports that she kind of got huffy when he said operatic, and then she said, do you mean jazz isn't legit? You might say that powders are being crushed in the mortar like some of the purple splay like limbs, the embracing limbs. For a while, poetry did not interest me with its flailing, corruption, boredom, obsequiousness, and general green color. It was a cloak used for taunting by everyone, assholes all. Flaubert thought the same thing about the bourgeoisie. Nothing is ever the same as they said it was. Blue lights of her hair vertical, the gray pearls of her neck, and the purple light of her hair, the black pearls of her hair, and the blue pearls of her hair. The black pearls of her hair were very colorful to the place, better or worse, where eyes penetrate. Bear forks, glitter, swan glasses, hiding among the bushes, sort of feeling your way. Arbus said the hand is the cutting edge of the mind. Flawed animals, meat and buns and slaw, had delicatem White where the branches gathered in my hand. Wood has dropped its pieces with trees along the way, where the couple walks the trail inside the creamy sand. The bassist said the action on the bass was high, vertically so, so that the elastic boom made for instant decay. Threadgill says tubas can control the decay and attack. Tubas blend with everything, whereas the bass doesn't blend. Brass will cut through anything. You have to wait on the bass. A tuba player, he says, can shut it down because it's wind. The bass player said during a long jam, he never gets a break. The glass of Pepsi has water already dripping down the side of the glass, from the ice skating in the armful of warm air. A woman bends to pat a multi-stripe cat, liquid gray, who prances between the aisles, listless and revolting with mystery. She loves the horrendous creature, whose eyes glow, yellow like a vial of pernow. Its tail upright plucking an e-minor because the story has become more complicated than when we left the house. Miles played in Tokyo and then Berlin, former scorched sectors, alighted in the terror-bot scopes. In Tokyo, in March 9, 1945, we, Americans, burned to death 100,000 people on a single night. Men, women and children. On July 14, 1964, Sam Rivers channeled T-bone Walker, among the velvet echoes, a cosine Anken hall. The dogan say that we should remember, God has no external ears. She cuffs her hands. Babies are like waterflowers who do cool leaves from the tubs of their eyes. Our ways of living differ. Two. Think of swaggers on off switch. Weldon Irvine said many of the young rappers got disconnected from a tradition of protest and decided to rap about mayhem in order to get paid. You can tell the political orientation of the bus driver by whether he says Lenox Avenue or Malcolm X Boulevard when he announces the stop. The large blue and white wheels slapped the painted curb covered with slush. November 80. I walked to school not knowing how to play with. I decided not unlike John Gilmour at Birdland 1956 to play Contra. We play against everything in the blaze of a hearth. We got the concept. We got the concept. We got conceptual. I'm on East 80th Street. The whir of pigeons have delicate lavender pockets around their eyes. They ground themselves in the spring of city dust as a pillowy aplomb among the air's granules. Of a city in its puzzle pieces, many tongue embraceable. Two men are dancing in a bar. It's 1130 according to the wall's cold aged Genesee Beer clock. They're dressed in 1980 styles. Valor and floppy existential caps. The shadows of the men's bodies are cast on the jukebox behind and their joy. What do you know about the forgotten ones? Try to understand the beautiful bodies, peeling pain and upturned peaches from a Marxist perspective. Why this city? Dactritus, denitations and detonations? Why the snail shell, uncomfortable water? The caramel tone of Saravon and the air is punctuated by wings. Instead of limbs, wings slice through at 80 degrees, assaulting through the sky's catapult, salted in polychrome. I'd like to be away from 1980 for a while and see its chemical pinks stripping from the unfeeling dinosaur eye of the iridescent pigeons. Another time from above or below. I will not take my father's footsteps. A miner's helmet with its bulb pierced with a tack and driftwood. Around a wall, the light bounces on a mirror with its white cotton. You are encased in the city's steel tub. Washboards scrap, empty grape drink bottle, frail, fall, literal, burnished. Do you feel the calm chewing the marrow from the gains the city has made? A half city moves along the mouth of a canal. You are living inside its corridors, breathing the air shaft smell of a fish bone. Your limbs reach across the threshold down the hallway of metal doors. It is that multi-hued avenue that comes at the park's edge after a mollusks snowdrift away from the window. Model jams coated in conceivable rust, the pigeons' peppery throats, blushed like the sorcerers bending the tab rings of their cans and all echoes. It is not only pushers and gathering places, storefront churches, crates of apples. We should not be east of the park, but no one knows we're here. If it is the paradise or the omni, swaying along the velvet curtain of the sky. Beyond the rooftops, I see the families create a father's day picnic out of a card table, boombox, a ginger ale, boxes of chicken, a dominoes game, clamped to a dude's lecture. I would run from the 125th Street Station down the sustained line of the sidewalk and wait for the elevator that stops to raise its pulley and flywheel and drop my trapezoid body and raise to the apartment to caress your hair or to let up or simply hold on. It is a familiar curvature, the places of valley, the cathedrals east. The same streets reach out in the same places to open the same mirrored lobbies. We arrive at the place where the wife relaxes and fold her legs in the floor in conjecture. At all the sidewalks traversed. She has me, a partner who knows that her memories are bubbles, that we see a far-fetched capital lift and break through tenements and wish like a creed we would travel along rifts and octaves to hear the doorbells and bird coos or feel the extraordinary orange of the Florida sun, a woman clutching an orange pill bottle, and we go along the snake like name-six and the keratin hooves of the city can always relieve us. We have people sitting around understanding the bubbles gloss anywhere the fragile numb inheritances. Answer the launching terrors, her axes and closet doors she remembers. We will burst them all along. A calm despair is the essence of wisdom. This string, she's moved over an air current. Now they rewind a latex balloon in Newark like a vacated building, the place rebricked for chump dimes, its thrennities slicing hammer. These strings preach at a husting. Pluck your needs from their housings, dive with your funnel to the back of the land in deep and fracture the unbodied air. This is about thick blood for a ghost in hues of sickle shaped jets. Listening to Cat Edmondson with R, Portis head in the car with N, but this quartet brings them back when the tenor's potato mash air explodes above the trench. The clarinet, all the klezmer bands used it when they eased themselves down from dark. Down, down, down, down. Prospero broke his black staff and Van Glorious light beamed out, the fairy light, slave light, shallow mow blue, music foot flatted the New Englander barn. Moon thin and rumbled bass, yeses and linets and sounded out vanilla sugar. Quavers of cholera turas made tint and abulation and eler ganda was the valve trombone and guitar, hush hush in the background and got cool quiet and wake the blues. Listen, listen and the light come through. The sweet obsession bleeds from Singer. Singer is dead today and in the ground forever. How astonishing his blue vapor is seeping, not consuming itself outward from his honey and body. He is buried in fine linen in the old style and his saxophone is engraved as a tiger lily. There was love in him. His love was not a wild stag nor fragrant oils nor hills of cinnamon. It was a light through the ocean, cool and content. He handed this poem to me and was born, sifting up to the surface. All the passions of my organs are soft doorways, the garden turns inside out. One dreams white as a sky, one black and crowded as trees. Each with a door, a rude odor, a reed. Remember him, darkest eyes playing like hell in the mountains, love like that blue, making up in depth for what it lacked in brightness. We will not speak of love with him again. You may not Premise a false nineteenth for all who do not serve. Thank you. Pray Diddyunts. The Lord favorite of such a church has. He has not cruised anywhere else than there may be knowledge of the house Michelle nipples itself. So You You In the lamp caught fire after he put a blue cashmere sweater over it. Good day Genesis, Dardenell's Edge, Dark Summider Down, Demon Axe Ellipse, Desirous Empire, Dov'elio Hippis, Dovetailous Spallier, Sallyary Eavesdrop Mozart playing a word sex game, just then the creamy squeezing oboe exalted unbolted, Kima Fillo and Belada plum beautiful music the color of blonde knight, Red plum jam on Pumpernickel, a Puerto Rican hermaphrodite putting on pink lip gloss. Wednesday night Ellington who could fulfill the slightest discolored saxophrage leaf easing between two rocks, heard through a catnap and half dozen chewed pencil tips, the baby green sweet pea billy exhale, blew through blue dukedoms passed on to accept that place which comes to each of us alone. Cause my So Thank you very much Thank you In the remaining time I'd be happy to address any questions you have or we would if there are any Well, it's a work of fiction so it's a character but similar to The writer but sometimes Not a tribute per se but sometimes in literature rather than Confront unstable or on savory or unpleasant topics you could do it through a character or a mask or some type of Device to increase the psychic distance between the writer and the subject matter So this character can be killed off he can do things that I wouldn't do And also the double play on the meaning of the word singer was just a useful device So that's what that was It's like Woody Allen they always ask him that is that based on your Albie Singer from But I mean even more recent films like his films from the 80s and 90s they always say that's based on your life You could say that it's just based on somebody who happens to go out with Younger women One of them happens to be a student of his or maybe a step door or something But you could say it's a little like me but it's not really Yeah Please use the microphone if you want to ask a question or comment so we can get you out of hand One other question Ragi? Yes I just want to say that I enjoy the music and poetry done together But this is a question for the cast Is it a music original composition? I'm trying to hear any other things picked up on other songs which I think are here But I've got to know what all the compositions were you're on? I made up all of them just now except for a few things This one is kind of like a New Orleans blues So even though I made it up it's within a very set format And this was body and soul And this is really based on all of me but I didn't really play it much It really goes And she's singing But I didn't really play that So it was all improvised but for those three I used so long forms that I'm familiar with The rest I just made up and people sometimes tell me they say Some of those were pretty good you should try and remember them and use them again So maybe I'll listen back and see You have a few other questions I do a lot of composing In fact I've done everything from short jazz tunes to symphony orchestra works So I do a lot of composing It depends whether if I think it was good enough to save Then I'll work on it and write it down Rob, you had a question? Yeah, other questions for this kind of collaboration of a poet and a pianist like this Working together reciting and then Finche as poetry collaborations since at least the 20s Langston Hughes, Hart Crane, Kenneth Rexroth, Kenneth Patchin Carowack, so on and so forth But the two of us have done this a few times at various places Cornelius Street once and I think at Rutgers once So there's a precedent This is more and more of it, my friend Vijay Aryar Who's a very successful jazz pianist He used to do a lot of that in the 90s He doesn't do that much anymore, I don't think He's got a lot of gigs with his own band now But the first time I saw him he was playing with a Mary Baraka Exactly But I will say this, the thing about the earlier days Through the 50s a lot of times what the jazz musicians did With the poets has just played tunes that they had already rehearsed So it's only more recently that you see people doing what we're doing I'm just kind of listening and trying to see what will go with that Some of the older collaborations are really just preset tunes They just say, okay, here's a tune that we already play So that might go well with this poem of yours So to actually improvise at all is not that common maybe I like the conversation The problem was that it was frustrating not to go over words So it was something about the balance between the piano and the recitation Yeah, that's why I kept asking you if we had it Well, it's an imperfect system We could still work on that, you know? Definitely You have to scream more when you're reading your poems I would suggest something that you might want to prove of And that is reading the poems before having the accomplished improvisation You mean read it once and then once with the piano? That's right What do you think of that idea? We could do that Some of them don't want to hear the poem twice, though How many people would like that idea of hearing the poem twice? Some people would like that How many people are too busy? Life is too short, they don't need to hear the poem Come on, you're busy, right? I understand Another option might be to put the piano further away from the poet And then, you know, the spotlight on you and your solvents Well, the only thing is... But I had a really hard time hearing that Well, in addition to that, just the logistics of the thing They're very clearly dense, complex things that I've written So, even if I read it twice, I don't know It might improve it a little, but I don't know how much that would do His poems are very erudite, you know, they reflect a lot of knowledge And a lot of knowledge of the history of poetry So there is a lot of detail in them It's not like poetry slam, where they just kind of... You can understand it's a minute you hear it, you know I have a question for each of you, though, because that wasn't a question In terms of... When you play the piano Are you improvising as you go along, or have you already read the poems prior to... Is this the first time you're hearing the poems? It's a good question We actually talked about that, because, you know, I have the book Which won all the prizes, and I have a... I've got a chapbook, another thing of yours So I have some of his poems, I've read them and enjoy them I feel like I know something about poetry I know something about the way poetry is structured and all this But we actually talked about whether I should have the poems in front of me Because I certainly don't know any of the poems well enough, I would know them by heart, you know, so And we decided that could actually be distracting for me So we decided not to do it that way And essentially I'm hearing the poems for the first time Because, you know, I've read them once or twice, but it's not like I really know them, you know And a question from Mr. Sanger I read in your bio your process of creating your poetry I read about your... I read about your... I'll accompany her when she says the question I read in your bio the process of your writing poetry So as you write down little snippets of observations Or a period of time and then it comes to you With that process, how many poems do you generate per year? Well, the past several years not as much as I've been writing a dissertation and doing under things But, I mean, ideally I would write as much as possible But in my opinion there are too many already Too many poems? Yeah, too many of your poems Well, in general, but I'd rather just be open to it and then have it come when it comes But theoretically, I mean, this has not existed, but I would write every day But in reality I try to just do it as much as possible I think maybe built into her question is the question is that a slow process? Yeah, oh, yes, it takes years sometimes for a single poem I'll work on it and you'll come back to it I wanted to make a comment about the difficulty understanding some of the words as you were reading I read your book of poems twice and enjoyed the poems And found myself enjoying the poems in a different way Hearing them presented in this format And I felt that missing out on some of the words that you can get when you're reading And there's silence around you, this was a different experience In which, in the fence, getting all the words wasn't that important And the sound of your voice was a kind of a music And it was more notes than semantic units I think if you've... This verdict is still out on what I'm about to say, it's my opinion But, I think if you've missed the rhythm in a poem, you've missed the whole ship I mean, the sound is... The pleasure for the ear is really what I'm there for a lot of the times So, I like that, but, I mean, not in all cases, in all times, I guess I can't, I just doesn't want to see the songs and fun or something Because you're doing the poem But what about giving the non-inspirational audience Yeah, that's one way to do it I have a bad idea And the audience has to buy the poems, yeah? Good one, huh? What do you think? Good, good? I think the... You know, one of my CDs, and then you play together when you get home, what the hell? Don't even stay for the performance, that's it, I'm going home I mean, ideally, these would require multiple readings or whatever But we do a kind of version of that I have a two-part question I was wondering, the structure of jazz, as opposed to the context, you know, of the poetry And I don't know much about the structure of jazz, could you just give us a little bit... An inter-dramatic, isn't fair, but I know classical music, but I don't know the structure And does it go, necessarily, with the rhythm of the poetry? So, you know, the con... And then the context, the subject I'm going to ask that a little bit differently from the way you asked it Because, first of all, in terms of structure... The thing about jazz is that you're improvising over a structure The structures you're improvising over are not so different from classical music structures So we'll talk about the first theme, the second theme, but we're improvising really on the harmonies of those themes In jazz, we always say box Goldberg variations are closer to jazz than most forms in classical music Because he takes a harmony and does 32 amazing different ways of playing over that harmonies That's kind of what we do But I also do free improvisation because I am a composer also, and I'm well versed in classical music So, one thing I did, I don't quite remember what it was, but it was kind of a debussy kind of thing You might remember something like... Well, Debussy, you know, I'm thinking about Debussy You know, Debussy was... A lot of composers will say he's the inventor of modern music A lot of composers, even Stavinsky said Debussy was like a god to him I don't know if you know this, but Stavinsky showed the right of spring piano version That he was using, not the orchestral, but Stavinsky was playing it on the piano to accompany the dancers And he showed it to Debussy, and Debussy's site read it He said, oh, this is rather good, Stavinsky was looking at him You can read that at site, it was a whole new kind of music But, so it doesn't really... I wouldn't really think about it that way Because the whole idea of Debussy is to get a sound that you like And he would use something that I sometimes call them cluster chords This one happens to be a diminished chord, this one happens to be a dominant chord But this is not jazz, you understand? So you can't make that comparison My point is when I do that, I'm not doing the jazz thing I'm not taking a set harmony and improvising over it I'm improvising the whole thing, including the harmony In the style that happened to be a little like Debussy, it was me But it happened to be inspired by Debussy It's like composition, but spontaneous Not everybody can do that, I mean I happen to be very familiar with classical music And I like doing that kind of thing, so that's different, that's not a jazz thing I think with the poems also, I want to try to create a... it's artificial to some extent But I create a situation that seems like it was inevitable So somehow spontaneous The context Well, the way that it sounds, the way the lines are broken, etc The subject, the context, do you address that? I try to, but I just want to say something about that Which is that most poets, not only poets, but almost anybody who accompanies Whether it's a pipe work with dancers, you do things for film sometimes Don't like it if you try to catch every nuance Because then, could you read it like reading? When it's thunder and he plays... And you go, you don't want that They don't like it if you go and try to emulate it He says, then I heard the blues And then I heard some thunder But then it started to rain You know, it sounds funny afterwards It sounds like a desire of something There's a skeleton Yeah, it sounds silly and by the way, in the film business, they used to call that Mickey Mouse thing Maybe they still do, because the idea is that in cartoons you do that But you wouldn't do that in a serious thing So we have talked about that, yeah, that's what I'm getting at So we have talked about that, and so what I try to do It's a little hard since I'm not so familiar with this poetry And some of them are things I hadn't read before But certainly the ones I had read before, as soon as I heard the beginning I kind of had a sense, okay, is this a dark mood? Is it a light mood? Is it a blue? Some of them mention the blues? You know, this kind of thing So in that sense, I try to do the overall mood of it, but not try to catch every nuance, you know And I was trying to play very softly behind them, too, with the soft pedal on here I have two comments. One is to combine, and you said make a CD And you should combine it and make the poetry CD, so we could take it with it Good idea And the second part was, again... It's now for you, for this heady idea Two percent The other part was, like other people mentioning, your words are hard to pick up sometimes And then you went into a kind of a Philip Glass melodic piece that tripped me out and I went to an altered state I saw you altered I noticed you altered when I put... I did it Yes Yes Something like that And then I was able to hear the words a lot clearer, since I went into an altered state And then you could hear it better? Yeah, yeah I dropped out and dropped in So what's the problem, folks? Just alter? Come on! That's right! Well, play more altered music Is that so hard? Come on! Yes! You're only trying to... Just having that about the experience It gets the problem Thank you Come on! Is it interesting that you've been teaching the conversation about you? Sorry about the conversation, but you saw an information about me I don't think so It's on the website, I think, right? David? Yes Well, there's a description on the announcement of Dr. Zach Rounds and public hands Yeah, and my site is easy to remember, LewisPorter.com Do you have a site? No These two famous to have a site? No I hope so I found myself drifting a lot in and out And sometimes it felt like the reading was competing with the music And sometimes I stopped listening to the words with that But then I'd come back and... I'm not sure what to say, I was in there I think that it would be interesting to study what people hear You know, how much I'd be doing and that's not The question could be too good It's an interesting process that listening to both things And sometimes, you know, I wonder why people either go into altered states Or trip out into reverie What in the music, what in the poetry, what in the collaboration I don't know, but just calm myself thinking of all these things It was very pleasurable all the time Whatever, notwithstanding what I say about feeling that they were in some instances Competing for my attention You know, I went in good places, I always came back I never felt like, gee, I missed something, oh, I'm sure I did I missed a lot of the public I certainly feel that the language or the words sort of takes supremacy I think there's a deliberate interaction and a kind of, as you described it was better But a give and take where you might hear that more certain moments or whatever Yeah, and I think also, you know, maybe when we're really successful You'll hear both at the same time, but that certainly would be different from person to person And another thing is that, but I am also doing certain specific things Like you might notice, I don't do any of my fast stuff while he's reading So certain rules, I just have certain rules for myself Nothing really fast while he's reading some of those things But my idea of slow is probably most people's ideas fast, so I do play a lot of fast notes What I think is that a role to be a little bit motivated Would be another way to do it like a couple of verses Well I did that with a band called the John L. Eric Kelso, quartet, it's on YouTube Oh yeah? I've a quartet in the summer They play, I don't know what you call it, Dixie Land kind of style of music But that's how we did it that time Oh yeah? But I mean, I think he means like line by line almost Well yeah, with that, I don't remember exactly what happened Not necessarily I think I read and they played and we kind of did it that way You know, again, it was my experience which I didn't completely anticipate That you felt more like a duet as if it were two instruments And one of the instruments was a vocal chord vibrating And the sense of the poem wasn't important as important in this context As it would be in a different kind of context Okay Also it's important to know that poems really should not or can't be paraphrased I mean, you've got to sort of experience the whole poem to get the poem You can't say what was it about, you know, the time I journeyed over to Ithaca and you know, it doesn't make any sense That's it You don't get it that way Well that's a good point because the whole point is the words that you're using It's like I always say Dickens is such an amazing writer of fiction You can read the plot summary, if that's all the work to it Then there would be no point to write the novel, you know The writer spoke about working over the manuscript a great many times and changing things But the pianist speaks about doing the improvisation right on the spot And not necessarily being able to repeat it Now that's two very different views of how to perform this work Now would you be willing to write it out, write out the music and change it, keep changing it Under different circumstances, or is this what's unique about this presentation That you have a poem let's say that's been worked over many times But a piece of music that hasn't been worked over many times Well, I mean in that example I think you're approaching sort of songwriting with musical accompaniment It's like Cole Porter for example That we know his compositions, love for sale or whatever it was, you know, every time But like summertime, another example I read there's 25,000 different versions of it Recorded versions of it, and each one is different, but they're all summertime So that's how that would work And also, I mean a lot of these poems I wrote them maybe 10 or 15 years ago So I have no clue what my mind was like at that moment, I don't know anymore But occasionally when I'm reading I kind of take something out or change it or Just to amuse myself But I would also say that that's a different thing since I do compose We could certainly collaborate, I would say I'm going to write a setting of one of your pieces Either with a written out piano part or string quartet, you know, which could be great You might like that, you know, and on the other side there are people who improvise poetry But you can't improvise the same way that I couldn't write, I couldn't improvise Some of my orchestral music, you couldn't improvise some poems that are very aerudite There's a certain kind of poem that you can improvise, which tends to be more on one level It's not a multi-level poem where you're having the middle of it some kind of a reference to something that T.S. Eliot did They tend to be more one-level poems and more direct and easy to understand But there is such a thing as improvising poems Also when you're hearing it, you're really missing a major component which is the lines Poems versus written in lines, there are prose poems which is kind of a stupid name But a lot of the information is contained in that Where the line is broken and for what reasons and so on and so forth Just one comment, generally in poetry, relatively modern poetry anyway, there's a feeling of spontaneity One feels as though the words were happening by themselves Jazz is sort of similar in that improvised jazz has that feeling of being spontaneous Even if organized, it's spontaneous So I think the collaboration is very much equal in the sense that you have two medias that are associated with spontaneity And therefore create their own sort of spontaneous interaction as they happen So I'm sort of not in favor of overworking and over-preparing Because that would certainly kill the goose that's laying ahead That was a point to that, that makes sense I guess our time is up No thanks, thank you Thank you We have folks there who have anyone committed to the age of no-profit project We have folks who have been committed to the age of no-profit project