 Hi everybody. Welcome to the inaugural meeting of the Helix Center for the 2015-2016 season. I'm Rob Penzer. I'm the associate director. And we have some terrific programs in store for you, but before I even tell you anything more, if you could silence your cell phones, that would be helpful in terms of the electronics in here for our recording. On Saturday, October 3rd, understanding genius with Steve Su, who's the vice president for research and professor of theoretical physics at Michigan State, Rex Young, associate professor of neurosurgery at University of New Mexico, Joanne Ruth Zatz, assistant professor of psychology at Ohio State, and Dean Keith Simonton, who's distinguished professor of psychology at UC Davis. Then on Saturday, October 24th, the realm of mystery, Saturday, November 7th, speak memory, Saturday, November 21st, translation matters. And then we have a special symposium in conjunction with the Adepth's Cultural Institute of Paris on December 4th, 5th, and 6th, a Freudian perspective on what ails contemporary culture. For further details on all of these, please go to our website, Pilexcenter.org, which is completely revised as of today, thanks to Erco Hanlon, our web developer and designer at Columbia University in EJ, digital media, and follow us on Twitter and Facebook too. Now to today's roundtable, epigenetics at work. And when I announce your name, if you could raise your hand so the audience can identify you properly. Francis Champagne, associate professor in the Department of Psychology at Columbia University, Zachary Kaminsky, assistant professor in the Department of Psychology and Behavioral Sciences at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, and jointly appoint in the Department of Mental Health in the Bloomberg School of Public Health. Fae Lee, assistant professor of biology at New York University, and Jessica Tyler, professor department of epigenetics and molecular carcinogenesis at the University of Texas MD Anderson Center. Okay, now we'll start. I'm going to start to ask you what these are epigenetics. I think there are a lot of epigenetics actually. So in my opinion, epigenetics have two major properties. One is particle phenomena that is independent of DNA sequence. And the second one I think is being practical through the cell type of genetics. Gen2 is a good one. What's interesting about definitions of that term is how you define it is really much shaped by the training that you've had or the field that you've come from. In my lab, we have a lot of discussions about this particular phenomenon. So if you're coming from the field of genetics, then epigenetics typically will be something that needs to be heritable because that's what genetics is really, the science of genetics is dealing with. If you are coming from a field that's looking more at molecular biology and gene regulation, then heritability is not necessary for your inclusion in the definition of epigenetics, really about processes that regulate gene activity without modifying the underlying gene sequence. But I'd say there's still debates, the funding agencies define it for us, which is a good definition to use because that will define who gets money on epigenetics. And they use a fairly broad definition that does not require that the demonstration that is heritable, in fact there's very few actual demonstrations of heritability of an epigenetic mark. So it's best that they probably deviate from constraining our definition. And to make it even more confusing, there's an intermediate definition, which is the inheritance of information, independent of DNA information from cell to the daughter cell when a cell divides. So that happens throughout our body all the time, which is different from passing on the information to your daughters or your offspring. Yeah, I think that's one of the common misconceptions when we talk about when we go on to Wikipedia and we read what is epigenetics and we see that these chemical modifications that are heritable, what that means is indeed, just to reiterate that point, it's passed from cell to cell. But what we really don't know and what has fascinating implications are, what does this mean for our kids, in the past we had thought that whatever we did didn't matter because it was all just our genetic code, our DNA, the blueprint of the machines of the cells. So this blueprint, the DNA is the same in every cell of the body. And this gets passed to our kids and it's fairly robust. So it doesn't matter if we smoke or if we drink or what we do. But now epigenetics comes along and it throws this twist in that, hey, what if what I'm doing can be passed to my children and all of a sudden the game has changed. And that's what I think makes this other inheritance, this transgenerational epigenetic inheritance fascinating. And it's definitely something worth a lot of discussion and it's also controversial. I think that there's two sides to the issue so maybe we should find out what side everyone's on. I agree. I think that's why I think epigenetics can have profound impact on ourselves because that means what we do and what we experience could have effect on ourselves and also our children's. Although this evidence to show that epigenetic code can be passed transmitted through cell cycle to cell cycle. But at least in mammals whether this epigenetic information can be inherited to the next generation to the grandchildren, I think it's still limited to the evidence. Maybe you can do more. I would say so, I mean I think there's phenomenological suggestion that something of that nature is going on. But it's a challenging question. It's not that people aren't asking the question. People are asking the question, it's a really methodologically challenging thing to do. So much remodeling is going on when the sperm and egg come together. That it's really hard to look at the time course at which these molecular changes are going on and seeing what is actually, are the epigenetic baggage that these cells are bringing with them? Is it being removed and replaced? What is going on? That's really challenging. But certainly in the behavioral models, especially when it comes to paternal effects, there's fairly strong suggestion that at least something is going through the germ cells. For example, we do a lot of experiments. Again, most of the evidence is coming from laboratory animals. We can certainly see patterns in long-lived species, but it's very hard to look at trench generational inheritance in a mechanistic way in humans. But if you take cell sperm from a male that has had some sort of life exposure, variation in nutrition or stress, and you take that cell and you fertilize an egg and you implant that egg into another female, you can see effects predicted by the male's experience in the subsequent offspring. So that does suggest that something is going through the sperm. Although there could be other processes at play and there could be other things going on, the sperm is a cell and it carries other things besides DNA and epigenetic modifications. So we don't know what it is, but something is going through. And I think that is actually a very big change to the way in which we've thought about the process of inheritance in general. So it is not a wipe away everything. Here's your new genome, work with it, and start anew. Normally there's probably a lot that is already in place and preformed. And I think the genomic imprinting literature has really helped to create some basis for the suggestion that this inheritance is going on. So we know that there are genes that in a sense carry a molecular memory of which parent they came from. They're either silenced or active depending on whether you inherited that section of your genome from your mother or father. So that suggests that something in your own genome has been influenced by the parents that you got it from. But then it's the question of whether we can extrapolate this to non-imprinted genes and environmentally induced phenomenon, but I think it's still questionable. So I have a question about genomic imprinting. But doesn't that get reestablished when you still have chemicals and molecules around the other than the DNA from the mother and the father from the egg cell and the sperm. So there is a ratio and re-establishment. Right. In the germline it's all re-arrased. Yes. But when it's re-established. Yes. I thought you still had some of the environment. You still have maternal factors that are probably driving the imprinting process in general. Right. There is something that is driving it from the mothers. And that's why studying maternal transmission through the germline is avoided quite actively because we can't remove the environment from the germline in that case. Whereas we suspect that to be more the case with fathers. Though, you know, father, sperm can influence the maternal environment and so on. So there's a lot of unique processes. Yeah, there's evidence like in 1944 there's a Dutch family, you know, a very famous example that the starvation through the grandparents can affect the grandchildren. So these evidence, I think there's some evidence, the transgenerational epigenetic inheritance. But still I think the molecular mechanism for me is still unclear. During germline stage and also fertilization, they can have drastic epigenetic reprogramming that tend to erase, you know, that the previous epigenetic marks. And how these epigenetic information can be inherently through, I think for me it's still a challenge to understand. But I thought the effects of a Dutch famine only persisted. A few generations. A few generations. Yeah, yeah. And it's complicated, especially with women because women carry inside them the cells that are going to produce are offspring. You know, they're developed. Even, let's say I was pregnant and I had a female baby in me. That baby already has inside it produced the cells that are going to be that baby's babies. So if my diet, my nutrition is really poor, I'm not only affecting me and the epigenetic marks on my genome, but also on my baby and my baby's baby. So this is why the great grandchildren is really important that an effect be seen in the great grandchildren of a female in order for it to be really transgenerational inheritance. Absolutely. But I mean, it's still completely valid that what we do in the way we eat, where we smoke our lifestyle, there's clear evidence from studies from Francis and other people that that affects the health of your offspring in severe ways, like likelihood of having obesity, diabetes, short lifespan, major effects due to our own diet. Absolutely. And those effects, you know, in some sense, it doesn't matter if it's going through the germline or going through some other factor. It means that the lifestyle or life exposures of one generation can absolutely have an effect in subsequent generations, grand to grand offspring, even great grand offspring. And so I think that realization is probably very important from a policy standpoint. And it doesn't, you know, you can separate that from the controversy over whether there is a mark that is being retained even when there's no exposure to poor nutrition or stress. Indeed. Yeah, we've been studying genetics for a long time, well over 30 years. And why? Why have we been studying genetics? Because family studies and twin studies have said that diseases are heritable. What does that mean? You know, what we do is we compare genetically identical individuals, monozygotic twins, to fraternal twins or dizygotic twins, twins that have differing amounts of polymorphisms or, you know, sometimes called mutations in the DNA. And we see that, hey, the dizygotic twins, the fraternal twins are more dissimilar than the monozygotic twins for various traits. We can measure how much does one twin gets schizophrenia versus the other. We call this twin discordance. And it makes a nice example for heritability. So if we see that more of a particular disease starts to happen with dizygotic twins, we say, well, we know that their genomes are different, so it must be genetic factors. But when it comes to, well, one of the problems is that we've been looking for 30 years and finding these factors hasn't happened. It hasn't really happened. And, you know, so now, you know, the genetics community is, you know, pouring millions and millions and millions and millions of dollars into this. And we have hundreds and hundreds and hundreds, well, not, damn it, maybe about 100,000 individuals in these giant genome-wide studies. And we're starting to find some very small, significant effects. So but not enough, not enough to account for schizophrenia, depression. And so it begs the question, well, what else is there? And this is where epigenetics comes in. And so to tie back to what we're talking about, okay, so mom's, you know, state of mind when she's pregnant, can affect the baby. And how does this happen? Well, it turns out, and this is sort of a new area, and a number of publications have been coming out in the last couple years, really. It's really in its infancy. But if mom is anxious, this actually correlates with epigenetic changes in key regions of our stress response genes, but not ours, in babies, babies stress response genes, as well as a number of sort of early measures like, you know, baby's cortisol response, or this methylation mark, this epigenetic mark, and these genes. And so it's a really compelling argument that, hey, maybe the reason we're seeing heritability, maybe the reason where we're seeing these traits inherited is because, let's say, mom is depressed, and then she becomes pregnant, and then this is going to affect the baby's stress response, or stress axis, the HPA axis, and this is a major risk factor for subsequent psychiatric comorbidities. And so we're really passing a trait not necessarily through the sperm and through the egg, although it's a possibility, a controversial possibility, but what is not as controversial as this idea that it is being passed through what we call a generational epigenetic effect, as opposed to transgenerational epigenetic inheritance? And I think, you know, that's something that makes the study of epigenetics very compelling. I also did read an interesting study. So why do you call it epigenetic effect? I'm not understanding. If it doesn't have to do with modifications, then why is it epigenetic? Well, so I think it's called an epigenetic effect. So I think Emma Whitelaw, who was one of the first labs to find one of these famous inherited epigenetic phenotypes in this mouse strain, the agouti mouse, it's a classical mouse example where an epigenetic difference, a DNA methylation difference, sometimes I'll say epigenetic, sometimes DNA methylation, DNA methylation can compact a DNA, it acts like a light switch, and it turned off this gene that caused the mouse coat color to change. And what's really interesting about this example, and I'm digressing for a minute, but I'll get back to it, is that this effect was passed on to the offspring. You could also drive the effect with different nutritional factors when the mother was pregnant, which was interesting. But anyway, Emma Whitelaw was saying she needs a terminology to distinguish between these passed on traits that go through the germline, which she was saying is transgenerational epigenetic inheritance, versus those that are passed, for example, through stresses to a mom when she's pregnant, or possibly behavioral changes that a mother may confer or bother a stressful environment when a child is in a critical stage like when their baby through things like maternal neglect, possibly postpartum depression, abuse, these sorts of things. So I think it's really just a terminology to try to distinguish those two. But it's actually very interesting because you mentioned, Emma Whitelaw has very strong opinions on the use of the term inheritance. So with very constrained views on when it should be used. And you outline exactly why she's done that. But we have a much looser use of the term. You can inherit money, and you don't have to be biologically related to the individual. But you know, and so rather than thinking of, you know, transmission, which could entail any mechanism, inheritance is really much about this kind of biological material around the DNA being transmitted. In a way, I had understood it. Maybe my understanding is already 15 years old was that epigenetic had to do with what you said, DNA methylation. So that's why if there is a DNA, something on the side of the DNA that is methylated, isn't that what epigenetic transfer means that goes there for? Yeah. So the modifications, either DNA modifications or some histone proteins, which are associated with DNA, so these modifications can change the structure of the counting, the DNA structures. So through that, it can affect the gene expression. They even turn down the gene or turn off the genes. So that's through the... Well, isn't that inheritance? It depends if you're going through the germ line and through meiosis, or whether you're just going through cell division and mitosis. That is not really inheritance, but it's still epigenetic if you're going through mitosis. Or if the environment in utero is affecting the growing baby, that is not inheritance because it's going through the cell cycle as well. So epigenetics is a broad word. So I'll go back a little bit. Why nature need epigenetics? So the genetics based on the DNA sequence, you change on the DNA, but epigenetics based on the modification of the proteins, histones, like a DNA modification. So why they need this system? One thing, I think your change DNA is difficult, it's a long term, but epigenetics code is more diverse and flexible and also reversible. And I think that both way the biological organisms response to environment, they take either genetics and the epigenetics pathways. I mean, have these advantages to response quickly and this phenomenon can be reversed also. There's an example I like to use for that. Why would maternal stress be good ultimately? Let's say we're a caveman and there's all sorts of dinosaurs around, right? That's accurate, right? And it's a very dangerous environment. Well, what do our genes want? Our genes want us to survive long enough to reproduce. Okay, they don't care if you live forever and ultimately get depression. They just want you to live into your 20s or maybe earlier in caveman times and reproduce. And so if it's a very dangerous time, you want your offspring to be jumpy. And so if mom is jumpy and you're having a baby and the baby is not going to go down to the water hole and just start being lax a day school, you want them to respond to twigs and so they stay alive. And this makes a lot of sense. That is exactly how epigenetics can help us. But of course in a society like ours where we're obviously not necessarily adapted in the same way, we may see some deleterious consequences of that. I did want to return to one aspect and we were talking about what is epigenetics and molecular marks. I did and I admit to not reading in detail, but this is sort of a bullet point from a review paper I was reading talking about what are some of those possible molecular marks that could cause an epigenetic effect or an epigenetic phenomenon to be inherited. And what's really interesting was when they took microRNA from sperm of fathers that were exposed to stress and injected the microRNA into the fertilized oocyte, they were able to create the same behavioral effect in the offspring. And there's epigeneticists who will say, oh, microRNA is or is not epigenetic. But I think the key is that it's not necessarily just written on the DNA. It's supposed to be a DNA sequence independent effect. So are we going to cut microRNA some slack and allow it to confer inheritance if the evidence goes that way? Then maybe. But I throw it out there as something interesting I read as a possible mechanism through which we might confer inheritance. And this is of course important because the typical ones and something that we haven't really stressed is that they get erased. And that's why we think that's why it's controversial. Because when sperm are developing and the eggs are developing, meiosis, and when we have fertilization, we have these massive erasures of our DNA methylation and our histone marks. And so the simple answer is that, oh, that takes care of everything. Well, then why are we seeing traits passed on in this way? And so I think it's important to point out that that's one of the reasons it's controversial. Yeah, absolutely, but the RNA, the small RNAs that that's talking about, there's evidence that the RNAs direct DNA methylation. So there's RNA dependent DNA methylation. So the RNAs, if they're inherited, they could help reestablish the methylation patterns, which then themselves affect the chromatin structure, which affects gene expression. I agree. So evidence in fishing yeast, in selgens, even plant, is this small RNA, a play very important role. So they can inherit it to next generations, then guide it to the DNA methylations, his modifications to ensure the inheritance of the same epigenetic information. Yeah. What's interesting about the erasure assumption is that it is based on studies that were conducted quite a long time ago. So it's become a dogma in the field that there's complete erasure. And certainly there's no doubt that there is genome-wide reprogramming. But I'm curious now with the tools that we have available to us, where we can look more than just at a gross level of whether DNA methylation levels dive down, but actually look at a single base resolution to see whether, in fact, even if 1% of the DNA methylation was retained, that'd be quite a lot of DNA methylation still retained in the genome. But it would seem like most, if 99% of it's gone, it seems like it's been completely erased. But I think that's something that we need to really explore in more detail. And you're right. And there was two recent studies done in mice primordial germ cells, which did exactly that. They did detailed DNA sequencing, a DNA methylation sequencing across the whole genome. And they actually found there was about 4,000 loci that did not lose the DNA methylation. And most of these loci were transposable elements. So actually, most of the human genome is made up of transposable elements that are usually kept silent all the time. And there's a few of them that are not silent, and they can still move around the genome. And when these are pieces of DNA, when they move around the genome, they're actually introducing mutations into the genome. And amazingly enough, where the methylation was retained was on these transposable elements. So there seems to be some mechanism that we have no idea yet how it works at the molecular level, whether they're being protected from this global erasure of the methylation marks. So that would be really exciting to figure out that mechanism. And there were some early studies as well doing cross-species pro-nuclei transfers, so taking nuclei, putting it in another oocyte of a different species. And depending on the oocyte context, you get less or more erasure. So there's probably a lot of oocyte factors that are directing the degree of erasure of these imprints. And so that's a really interesting source of individual variation and whether these marks actually persist. And it could well be these small RNAs because transposable elements generate pi RNAs. Right? Right, I think so. Yeah, this cluster of, you know, I've been read about them for a year or two, but yes, something that they're basically designed to silence these elements. Indeed. Sorry. Yeah, I've also heard about that during the Golden Conference. You know, in the sperm, keystone usually replaced by protonium. That's right. But now you realize that at least some are still there, like 5%, and some even still maintained the keystone marks for the previous generations. So that also, as you said, could play a role in the generational inheritance. Yeah, and so it was interesting. So one of the studies that focused on histones and their role in transmission looked at cocaine exposure in males, and their findings were exclusively in histones where you see this retention as you say. Although I wonder whether it's being retained or reapplied. I mean, that's, I guess the question is that there's a lot of area that we don't know from when we go from one generation to the next, but what exactly is going on? But certainly if you look at multiple generations, you'll see the mark. It's whether it's staying there or whether it's just being reapplied. That's the question. Yeah. So I read one study where various histone variants had been tagged, and they did show that they were retained at least up to the first cell division after fertilization. But I think it is a compelling, you know, source of possibility that histone variants that are retained and not replaced by protomines could confer some information. It's important to keep in mind that the 10 to 17% that people have detected is enough to account for the entire coding genome. So I mean, there's enough information in there in theory. But it's also important to keep in mind, why don't we have these answers yet? And it's hard to study this because, you know, it's sort of like the wave particle duality in quantum physics. Once you look at that, once you take that sperm and egg that was going to become that mouse. You no longer get to test the mouse later on because you've looked at the sperm and egg level. So then, you know, it's really hard to look at the exact cells that are going to eventually develop. And I think that's one of the challenges. So we're faced with these averages. We have to take 10,000 sperm or a million and sort of infer what's happening. And the only way to get experimentally at this process involves embryo transfer and vitro fertilization, which are all very artificial in their process and how that epigenetic effects in it of themselves. So this is one of the issues that we come across when we do these studies in the lab. We can show it through embryo transfer. But you've done something that's completely unrelated to the natural process of reproduction and whether it's relevant. I think that you can kind of expand that kind of concern to, okay, perhaps we would be able to show epigenetic inheritance in the lab in species that are short-lived. But would it be relevant on a wide-scale process, you know, in society, in natural environments where you have long-lived species that need to adapt to changing environments all the time. So when people start talking about epigenetic inheritance in response to the quality of the social environment, I thought, well, why would you want your social environment to be inherited through your germline? That seems nonsensical in terms of adaptation. You should respond to the social environment which you're in and adapt accordingly because that's the best predictor of the world that you live in. But I still think it's possible, but I think we need to think about whether these would actually play out in the real world. When you say social environment, I mean, I'm a molecular biologist. What do you mean exactly? Anything from the quality of mother-infant interactions to peer interactions to, you know, adults' social interactions, so whether you're socially isolated or interacting with groups. The problem, I guess, is that you can never separate social interactions from stress reactivity. And so stress may be transducing the information. Certainly we think in the case of mother-infant interactions, it's not that, let's say, that the pure sociality of it, but rather the physical aspects of mother-infant interactions that are transducing the epigenetic marks. So are you saying that social interactions of a mother can affect the social interactions of the offspring? Well, they certainly can, yes. Well, I know the nurturing studies, but older, because then how do you separate nurture from nature? In what, be more specific? So what's the nature element of it? Like you're around a mother who never interacts with anyone. Oh, right. So in, I work in rodents, right? So we have control over nature. Everyone's got the same genome. But yes. So the issue, and I think this is really important in the context of these discussions, is that in humans you have genetic variation. And you have a lot of what can be called many things, but niche selection. So people find themselves in environments because of biological drives that may be driven by DNA sequence. So it is almost impossible to separate out these questions. There's some really interesting work now in humans, now that artificial reproductive technology is so widespread in its use to look at egg donors and embryo transfer and all, you know, where mothers are caring offspring that are not genetically related to them and all these various combinations. And it does suggest that there are some later life characteristics, psychiatric illnesses that are driven by, you know, matches or mismatches between the genetic characteristics of the mother and genetic characteristics of the offspring or something about the in utero environment. A lot of the studies now that are focused on human analyses of epigenetics really are highlighting that you need to look at both the genetic variation and epigenetic variation together. So they're not separate entities. Only in the lab we treat them like that, but we're working with organisms that don't have genetic variability. But there are gene environment interactions at the level of epigenetic changes is, you know, widespread. And I think you can't, you probably won't be able to predict very well later life phenotypes solely based on epigenetic variation in humans. You'll need to know the code. Also, I think how's the epigenetics implication to evolution? So this landmark theory, what do you have the idea? You know, it's interesting. So, you know, in some ways I don't have any strong views on the role of epigenetics in evolution. I think it's probably a great mechanism for conferring adaptation as Zach was discussing. So we have genomes. They're fairly stable over generations. They evolve, but it takes typically long periods of time to evolve. But we need to adapt to rapidly changing environments. So it confers that. That means we survive, we pass on our genes. So I would predict that genes that confer epigenetic plasticity would be highly selected for because they would allow us to adapt. But you know, then I think we get more into kind of theoretical philosophical musings about how this plays out in evolution. Certainly there's some suggestion that, you know, we're talking about retrotransposons. Areas of epigenetic variability or, you know, or stability may be areas where there's also likelihood of genetic variation. So, you know, there may be a process where if there's a lot of epigenetic variation going on, you know, between or within generations perhaps that will stabilize into the genome somehow through genetic variation. But I don't have a lot of strong views on it. I think it doesn't have to play out in evolution in the way that genes do. I think it should be its own entity as it should be within the discussions of inheritance. So I'm more of an inclusive inheritance thinker when it comes to the term and the mechanisms of inheritance. We can transmit information in a number of ways through social, through parental effects, through genes, through epigenetics. They're all different mechanisms working together to confer inheritance. But of course inheritance is just a mechanism that's important for the evolutionary process. It's not the only one. I'd like to add to that that I think, you know, if, you know, the standard image of Lamarckian inheritance is this, you know, pseudo giraffe animal that isn't yet a giraffe, and then the giraffe stretches, tries to stretch its neck. And then over time its efforts to change itself, you know, have resulted in changing its genome. And I think, you know, we have to be careful to think that, you know, anything could, you know, let's assume for a moment that epigenetic inheritance does exist, all right? You know, the studies have been done 10 years from now and turns out things are passed through the germline. It's not going to be everything that we do. It's going to be factors that we know reprogram the epigenome. So we, you know, things that affect us like stress, like other hormonal exposures. You know, why do we have this, you know, okay, I'm in the psychiatry department. So most of my examples will be psychiatry related. But why do we get these on sets of schizophrenia right after puberty, and why do we have sex differences in depression? Well, you know, and what is it with stress? What we have are hormones. We have these factors. And this is just one example, but we have steroid hormones, and these steroid hormones bind a particular type of receptor that recruit epigenetic modifiers. And so it is not that far-fetched to understand why these would reprogram the epigenome molecular biologists will be able to name all the various co-factors that are recruited, your NCORS and P300s, and there's many more that I'm ignorant of. But it's important to keep in mind that if we do have this passage through the germline, it's going to be in distinct areas and not necessarily everything. And so as we learn more about what changes our epigenome, what specific environmental factors, cocaine or smoking or alcohol, we'll be able to understand exactly what's getting passed and why, what type of psychological experiences and why. Oh, this abuse caused a bolus of stress hormone response at this particular developmental time. That's going to get passed on, but it's not going to be stretching the giraffe neck or practicing real-hearted basketball to get a scholarship. And now my kids are going to be great at basketball. That's not necessarily going to be it. Exercise could cause endorphins, which may affect these systems. And then, you know, our children may have different stress responses in the brain, but it's not going to be everything that's inherited. And I think that that's important to keep in mind. And Lamarck was, you know, very careful in his theorizing, if you actually read what he does, you will have had to have had exposure to an environment for many, many generations before it becomes propagated through inheritance. Both parents would have to be exposed. So you couldn't just have one parent. It would have to be both. And what was being propagated had to confer some sort of adaptation to the individual inheriting. So, you know, and we don't use any of those criteria when we're testing these hypothesis. And also, when it comes to Lamarck, the prevailing theory of inheritance at the time was pangenesis, which was this idea that little particles of every cell in your body would break off into your gametes and be transmitted directly to offspring. Now, maybe microRNA are a good, you know, part of that story reemerging. But it's certainly a very different way of thinking about inheritance in general than we do now. And I think, you know, I think there's room for Lamarckian ideas. At least epigenetics provide a potential mechanism for all the marks, the theory. Yeah. You can inherit it through these epigenetic marks rather than changing the DNA sequence of like a classic Darwinism. Right. You mentioned in terms of offspring two situations, one is, let's say, the mother who gets depressed during pregnancy or is depressed and gets pregnant. But another is a mother who gets depressed after the baby is born. Is there a difference? Yeah. So that's a good question. And so we know, for example, if we look at the children of women who have postpartum depression, they have a lot of problems. They have developmental delays. They have dysregulated stress responses themselves, a higher chance for psychiatric home morbidities. And this has a lot to do with Francis' work that has to do with maternal offspring bonding and how this can ultimately affect stress systems through epigenetic reprogramming. So there may be other mechanisms at play, but I think, you know, that's the most highly studied and well known. And what happens during pregnancy is less well studied, but it looks like some of the same gene pathways are being affected. You know, I think that the reason we know that is because we had the targets to look at first. It's like, well, where should we look at this? You know, well, let's look where we know what happens in the postnatal environment. Oh, we see an effect there. Okay. And that's necessarily the only place that we're going to see this effect. But I think, you know, we're basically the messages very similar that both periods could be a risk period. And I think with prenatal depression, there is an assumption, though, you know, that a lot of work needs to be done to test whether this is true, that the signal, the depression, is transduced to the baby through stress hormones and other physiological changes during the pregnancy. We're currently looking at the placenta as something that might be modulated by depression and actually modulate the way the offspring is developing. When it gets to the postnatal period, as Zach mentioned, it's probably more about the dyadic interactions between the mothers. So depressed mothers will engage in less positive affect towards the baby that will increase stress reactivity. And they'll engage in less nurturing care. And so... We don't have epigenetic? Yes. Yeah. So, I mean, presumed because in humans, this has been certainly less studied. Although there's some interesting work looking at stroking. So tactile stimulation, that's the kind of rat equivalent of what we look at when we look at maternal care. But, you know, certainly depressed mothers engage in less tactile stimulation of their infants. If you give human infants tactile stimulation, it does modulate epigenetics in the infants. So certainly a possibility. And have there been studies of, let's say, post-traumatic disorders, fathers or mothers who then have children? And what happens? There's been some recent studies of PTSD and in the context of Holocaust survivors and their children. And I think they are seeing certainly epigenetic signatures in offspring and grand offspring as a consequence of a prior generation's trauma. So it does seem that you see the epigenetic mark. One hand, on the one hand, the way you said it implies that this is proven. But then it seems that there was some question about this kind of inheritance. Ah. So there's proof of an association. There's not proof that the epigenetic mark has been laid down by the trauma in the first generation and be transmitted like DNA is transmitted to subsequent generations. But the multi-generational correlation in, let's say, characteristics that might be associated with trauma in a previous generation, there's certainly a lot of epidemiological data to support that. But that's not proof of mechanism. It's simply proof of phenomenon. And in terms of cancer, what is the relationship of cancer with epigenetics? Cancer and epigenetics. So many cancers are sporadic, meaning they happen in your body as your body ages. There's, most of them are not genetic per se. There are certain subsets of breast cancer and ovarian cancer that is genetic. But most of them are sporadic. So that means it's not inheritance in the real term of inheritance. But as far as the role of epigenetics in cancer, meaning changes in the histones, changes in the DNA methylation, which in turn changed the chromatin structure and the whole relevance of changing the chromatin structure is the result is you change gene expression. So DNA, genetics information, is just information. DNA doesn't do anything other than carry information. It's the proteins and the RNAs that are copied from that information that are important, that will make you healthy, will make you sick. And so when the epigenetic information changes from what should be normally going on, that is what will cause disease. So there's clear evidence now that known tumor suppressors like P53, there are thousands and thousands of labs that study P53 and P53 mutation. There's clear evidence now that, so the mutation kills the function of the P53 protein, which normally stops cells dividing out of control. So now it's mutant, the cells will divide out of control. But there's evidence that the P53 gene product is inactivated just as frequently by epigenetic changes, not mutation. And there's growing evidence that that's the case with other important genes that are needed for protection from getting cancer. There's epigenetic changes that stop those genes from being expressed. And it's the harder thing to study. I mean, DNA sequencing is a lot easier than mapping epigenetic profiles. But I think there's a subset of cancer researchers that now believe that epigenetic changes could be the first changes that allow a subset of cells to divide more quickly. If you divide more quickly, you're more prone to DNA mutations. So some of us think that the epigenetic changes will lead to or provide a pool of cells that are selected for developing into cancer. And I think of evolution in a very similar way that I think these epigenetic changes that can happen quite rapidly as an environment changes allows us all to fit a certain niche. And then you have a population that is now more prone to a mutation that will stabilize that change in phenotype or behavior. So I think there's a lot of parallels between cancer and evolution. And also aging. I mean, our cells change as we age. And age is the largest risk factor for most cancers. So many of us are trying to understand the process of aging, to try and understand predisposition or delaying the onset of cancer. So yeah, it's a really hot area. And what's really exciting about epigenetic changes is that unlike genetic changes, so changes to your DNA, when your DNA changes, it's pretty much permanent. It cannot be reversed. The technologies are not available for us in the laboratory to reverse genetic changes, although that is likely to change pretty soon. But epigenetic changes, because their epigenetic information is put there by enzymes. So you're adding a chemical group by an enzyme. You're removing a chemical group by an enzyme. Our enzymes can be easily inhibited by designing small molecules or chemicals to block the active site of an enzyme. So there are many drugs that are out there and being developed by all the big pharma companies to block epigenetic enzymes in order to reverse these epigenetic changes. So the idea is you can now give these drugs to a cancer patient and now turn on the expression of the tumor suppressor gene to stop the cancer cells dividing out of control. So it's a huge area developing epigenetic drugs and also looking at the epigenetic signature to see if you can predict outcome of how bad the disease would be and predict which treatments would be more effective depending on not only the DNA sequence, but also the epigenetic information. Another way epigenetics is through regulating chromatin structure. For example, the chromosome organizes distinct domains, one important domain called the centromere. Centromere is important for chromosome segregation during mitosis. If it's misregulate the centromere, they also could cause cancer. And you get aneuploidy, that's when you gain extra chromosomes. I should have said actually the centromere that this gentleman studies is actually the only clear evidence of inheritance of a chromatin structure through cell divisions. It's a really interesting and unusual mechanism. Yeah, I wanted to return to the issue you just brought up of essentially personalized medicine and the hope that epigenetics brings to this aspect of things. So it's a little bit farther away from inheritance, but I mean you could think of it that if we do inherit some risk for a disease, we may also inherit the ability to better metabolize a particular type of antidepressant or not. We know that some genetic factors allow this to happen, but it's definitely a hot topic that if we find an epigenetic signature of responders to this SSRI or non-responders to this particular SNRI, we may be able to tailor what medications to give it. And again in psychiatry, this is very important because essentially there's a lot of trial and error that's done to find what medications will work. And of course skilled psychiatrists can often do a great job of getting there quickly, but I think with more and more antidepressants being prescribed by general practitioners, having epigenetics as a tool to personalize these treatments to people could ultimately lead to a lot less suffering in the future. And I think, you know, I know the FDA has before it some proposals regarding the reevaluation of all of their approved drugs to determine whether there are in fact germline effects. And that's a question we don't know about most of the drugs we take, whether they, you know, we have some indication whether they would be dangerous to take during pregnancy, but even in that case there's a lot of question marks. But there's, that's not routinely part of their testing and that would be next to near impossible in humans, although they could certainly look at whether germ cells are affected, but not whether it would continue. They can certainly look in animal models to see whether there's a transmission. Yeah, that's a great point. I mean, one of the known antidepressants monomine oxidase inhibitor is actually, you know, we know that it blocks various monomine oxidases and keeps dopamine in the synapse, but it also is a lysine demethylase inhibitor, which acts specifically on the histone code on these nucleosome marks that can compact or relax DNA. And so, you know, the question is, well, when we give these drugs, we know that we're increasing the neurotransmitters in the synapse almost immediately, and yet it takes about a month to work. Why? Right? So it could be that the efficaciousness of these medications could be due to transcriptional factors, could be due to how long it takes them to modify the epigenome and really get that transcriptional machinery in the neurons in the cells to change things and really change the underlying makeup of what's going on. But it does bring up that issue of, okay, you know, I'm taking antidepressants, it's working on my brain, that's good, but what is it doing to the sperm or to the eggs? And does that matter? And what are the consequences? And we don't know. Okay. Questions? Yeah, go ahead. I'm using microphone that would be at the same. You know, one interesting aspect of genetics is that IQ is inherited. So I think it was Stephen Pinker who said that if you look at a population of children, you can compare them to the parents, you can describe 50% of the genetic, 50% of the IQ variation is being genetic. Now a lot of studies seem to have indicated that during the course of your life you can do things which improve your IQ. So the question is, over generations can you do changes which can improve the IQ of, you know, your grandchildren as compared to the grandparents? Or is it something that is completely genetic? That's if you want it. I'm sorry? That's if you want them to be more intelligent. That's a solution. I'm more concerned about doing the reverse to my children, reducing their IQ. But maybe you can know most about this. Oh, well, I mean, it's a great question. I mean, I think, so, yeah, that's sort of one of those Lamarckian, it brings us back to the Lamarckian issue of can we make our son a good basketball player and then pass that on? And I don't know. I mean, I guess if you, if a lot of the IQ factors, the genes that influence IQ are inherited by the DNA sequence, I could imagine that something you're doing might be, could potentially free up those genes in an inheritance way. But I don't know, it's quite speculative. I would also assume that it would be difficult to discern the factors that have caused you to improve your IQ as well because you're going to impart through your environment this intelligence to your children. You're going to use bigger words. You're going to probably focus on school a lot for them because you've come to value intelligence. I mean, it's tough to imagine what specific molecular mechanism that would work through. But also, is IQ, I mean, IQ is based on certain questions that you answered. It's not the... Right. Right. You could be trained to answer those kind of questions better. But it's an interesting question. And the problem with human studies is personally usually not allowed to do them. So it's just observation of what's normally going on in the population. And they are really, really slow. I mean, people don't live long enough to do a study on someone else's offspring and their offspring. So we're going to have to wait. It's a great question. And I'm sure the future will answer it. But when, you know, going back to points you were making earlier about the twin study. There are concept of heritability is based on, you know, the models of twin studies that have been conducted historically. We don't usually use that approach anymore. In fact, twin studies are now mostly epigenetic analyses because it's great because now you've got individuals who are monozygotic and then you can look at how they deviate in their epigenetic code over their lifespan. But I think the more people are learning about epigenetics and environmentally induced changes in gene activity. The more that I think we should question the basis for heritability estimates and the assumptions underlying those estimates because certainly monozygotic twins share more similar environment than we've been able to characterize. And if environment is laying down these epigenetic codes we have to keep that in mind. And it's hard to quantify. But I think it's something that we should kind of think about in the back of our mind. Certainly, as you mentioned, genes don't do anything unless they're instructed. And so that is what these gene regulatory mechanisms, epigenetic mechanisms do. And so though we may inherit genes that will increase reaction time and, you know, the way in which we perceive, interact with the world, we can layer in more information on that which leaves room for the epigenetic enhancement or decrement. I'd like to just make it a little bit more confusing with the twin studies. One interesting aspect when it comes to epigenetics that is rarely ever taken into consideration is the issue of coreanicity. That has to do with when the twinning occurred. So if a twinning occurs very early then everyone gets their own placenta and amniotic sac and everything. And we call these dichorionic twins. But if it occurs, 70% of twins occur after day four and then we get a shared placenta and we get these shared connections. And this makes everything really confusing because the twins share stem cells to a degree, which means that if we study the blood of those twins, they're going to have been swapping and so it makes it harder. And so if any of these factors were conferred into the later phenotype, then this is going to mess with the heritability estimates. It's if something in the interuterine environment influences that IQ that we're looking at heritability for then this is going to mess with things. Also just sharing doesn't make it simple because they also don't share evenly. So in extreme cases we'll get what's called a twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome where one twin will be very nutritionally deprived and the genetically identical twins come out very different because they haven't had equal blood flow. And so these factors, the coreanicity, is never taken into account in twin studies and can greatly influence heritability. And epigenetic changes in those situations? Yeah. So we showed a few years ago in 2009 that the monochoreonic twins, the twins that share the blood stem cells are more epigenetically similar in blood because they share. But if you look at other cells like buckle cells, they're much more epigenetically different probably because of these nutritional effects. And this was then replicated by four other groups or so. So it's a very robust finding that twins that share these blood connections are very unequal in the amount of epigenetic reprogramming that they ultimately end up with. So does this mean that if you twin later you're going to have more discordance for schizophrenia or depression or metabolic syndromes maybe. But it's never quantified. People don't quantify the placenta. So we should. Just a question. This has been studied with Lamarck and non-Lamarck and that it's what took so long to get to this point. I think it's for the epigenetic field we just started like 30, 40 years ago. Just realized this new mechanism. Why not in the 1870s? 19 years. Well, I think Darwin's theory also included some of Lamarckian's ideas. Just I think people like to kind of take out of someone's theory the bit they like. And Darwin support the ideas of acquired bio-cutery that can be inherited. Absolutely. If pan-genesis is your theory of inheritance then the cells are modified by life and they shed particles and they're inherited. It's interesting to think about the sociological factors at the time that led to the dismissal of Lamarck. Now, certainly August Wiseman is usually attributed with that because he did an experiment rather than give example after example after example of the inheritance of acquired characteristics. He did a study. He chopped the tails off mice. The offspring of those mice did not have short tails. The grand offspring of those mice did not have short tails. The great grand offspring of those mice did not have short tails. And he kept chopping each generation. So he tried. And in fact, one experiment well-characterized was seemed to be enough at the time. So that suggests that there are other sociological factors at the time that were probably swaying people away from the Lamarckian view. And also August Wiseman presented the idea of the Wiseman barrier whereby the germ cells were special and protected. And we still have that assumption that the germ cells are protected. They are different cells. They are certainly different cells from the rest of the body. But we have this assumption in the back of our mind that what goes on with our other cells could not possibly affect those cells. And so that stayed in as a dogma. And I think still kind of influences the way people think about sperm and eggs. And I think really you need the molecular tools to be able to divine these changes. So when you have dogmas come into science, you need proof and very strong proof to get rid of them, not just philosophical ideas. So I think part of why now is because now there are studies that are believable that do support these ideas, at least for passing on to several generations like studies that Francis has done. So now there is evidence that is convincing, at least for short term, Lamarckian inheritance. Another is technology improvement. Like 100 years ago we don't know how to delete genes and to look at what is happening in the cell. Now we have advanced technology just analyzing all these phenomena in the molecular and cellular levels. To help understand to this phenomenon. Maybe we are getting smarter. So I have two questions. The first one is more simple. Is the evidence showing that it is easier to turn on genes or is it easier to turn off genes or is it one harder than other or is it pretty much? Depends on the state of the gene that you are trying to turn on or off. Okay. If it is solidly in a very tight chromatin structure then it is very hard to turn on. So I guess to answer your question, repressive states are easier to inherit than active states. So repressive states are more permanent in general. That is what I was getting at. The other question pertains to horn mises. I don't know how familiar people are with horn mises. Just homeopathy and things of that nature when you have a low exposure to toxins and stresses. I am thinking from a chronic point of view, for example, of someone running and causing information in the body. Much good comes from that as well. So I am just thinking as far as horn mises, if anyone does know about the subject as it pertains to our health, how does that tie into epigenetics? I am enthused by the subject because I have been to many health conferences where they speak very favorably of horn mises but I am sitting through the panel. I am thinking to myself perhaps you can have damages that pass on to the next generation. Is that specific to inflammation? I am not familiar with it. Or did you mention environmental toxins? Just homeopathy. Are you familiar with that field? Just the idea that a certain degree of stress on systems tend to evoke the imperative conditions. Low doses and then over the course of a life, not just one instance. This is more a health related question. We know that things like exercise are good for depression and cognition and they promote brain-derived neurotrophic factors that ultimately result in synaptogenesis in the hippocampus and basically are very pro-good mood. And so that one mechanism that comes to mind is if you have pro-good mood then you are not going to have these high cortisol levels that will be passed. So I don't know if the endorphins or epinephrine that you are generating are going to reprogram or pass the placenta in the same way that people are studying cortisol because people are studying cortisol and they are not studying that. But in theory they could or they will at least reduce that and that is one way that you may pass your good mood on to your kids. As a final note I feel as if the very near future will discover how we are looking at how, you know, I feel like just on the subject of running for example it is perhaps a double edged sword where they will see, they are studying all the good that comes from it and then oh wait a second, 15, 20 years, not running perhaps with just other subjects. We didn't see that there was also this negative that was simultaneously happening with all the positive concurrence. I love this field. Thanks. Sure. Those cytokines that you are creating could if they epigenetically program. And good and bad is so contextually dependent. So something can be good in one context but very bad in another. And even low levels of maternal care which we would say are bad. Programs offspring to engage in less care which we would say is bad but it also enhances sexual reactivity. If you have teenage daughters you probably think that's bad too but if you are a rodent and you are trying to propagate offspring in a stressful environment it is a very good thing. So you know really you know thinking in terms of the way our body adapts we adapt to the context we are in that allows us to survive and propagate in that environment. Some of the characteristics we might see might seem maladaptive but often that is in another context. So PTSD for example is a good example. Having being vigilant not being able to sleep and being very anxious is not great if you are living in a lovely, wonderful, stress-free suburb but probably very good if you are in a traumatized war zone. So that's another thought. I was curious how we read the epigenetic marks. Does the standard gene sequencing machinery give you the epigenome? That's my basic question. And the second question is my epigenome constant throughout my body. So I will answer the second one first. Is your epigenome constant absolutely not? Every single one of our cells has the identical DNA information. The identical genetic code in every cell. The only reason why our cells are different like why some look like a hair cell, some look like a you know a skin cell is because of the edge of the genetic information. And that's because the epigenetic information changes the chromatin structure, changes the chromosomes. It even makes them more open or more closed, inaccessible in a very local manner. So some genes can be accessed by the machinery that copies the information and some genes cannot. So it's where those marks are along the genome that's critical. So then it sounds like there's a, the marks appear to give the, to differentiate the cells. Absolutely. But the environment changes on top of that. Yes. Is that right? Yes. Exactly. So if I wanted to know my epigenome, I would have to look at each cell type throughout my body. Yes. And even in individual cells, that's the technology that is now being developed. And then how would you read it? Let's say we took a skin cell of mine. Yes. So it depends what you want to read. If you want to read DNA methylation, there's a really clever trick where you just add a chemical called biculfite and it changed, I always get this wrong. It even changes the methyl C's to a U or a C-O-M-Methyl. Actually it converts any modified C's. It could be methyl, but it could be other groups to U. U. And then when you run PCR, it converts to a T. So when you sequence, you get a C to T conversion. If there's no methyl, and it won't convert if it's methyl. So that's really easy. Measuring histone modifications is a lot more difficult. You have to have an antibody that is specific to that particular histone modification. By modification, I mean a phosphate, an acetyl, a methyl group, but small chemicals or small elements. The antibody has to recognize that mark. And then you do a technique called chromatin immunoprecipitation where you shatter the genome into tiny fragments of about 500 base pairs. And then you immunoprecipitate, you pull down with a immobilized molecule. The antibody and whatever chromatin is bound to it, and then you sequence that piece of DNA. So that is a lot more challenging, a lot more expensive, but I was talking to someone recently at Mass General that is developing that technique on a single cell basis. I mean it's amazingly cutting edge, probably shouldn't have said that. The issue of the cell differences in epigenome in response to the environment is a huge one when it comes to doing human studies. So especially if you're interested in behavior in a more psychological state, because we're often interested in what's going on epigenetically in the brain, but we can't access that tissue. So we rely on blood and buckle cells. The animal work suggests that for some epigenetic modifications you might expect to see concordance between brain and blood or buckle cells, but for many other genes you won't. So it's really constrained the translation of a lot of the basic science to human studies. Yeah, and you're also going to get just a very brief point. You're going to get a soup of cells. If you're taking the brain you're going to get some dopaminergic neurons, some serid allergic neurons, you're going to get a lot of glia and some oligobendrocytes, and you're going to get this one number representative of all of that, based on looking at one position. So it takes a little bit of a look at the way it will go in future. Yeah, a single cell. Yeah. Very expensive. I'm sure. Hi, is there a relationship between epigenetics and character development? In what development? Is there a relationship between epigenetics and character development? Character. Not just personal, but collective as well. So I could say yes, but that's, you know. I mean you elaborate on that. So what you're asking is to go from the level of a molecular modification in a cell to the way in which someone interacts with their environment on a regular basis. That's what you're talking about. We're talking about character or personality. And you know, certainly the way in which, you know, your brain functions and your cell function is going to be determined by the gene regulatory mechanisms, epigenetic mechanisms in the cell. We don't know how you get from that to these kind of broader states. Certainly there's effects on stress hormone systems that have global effects on the way in which we behave in our personality. There will be effects on certain neuron populations in the brain that might affect your anxiety levels and depression or your risk taking, let's say, as another character. But we have a long way to go before we build in, you know, figure out the pathway where we get from one to the other, even in animal models. It's very challenging to do. Unless we look at a very simple behavioral output, it's challenging. Yeah, just to add on to that, I think it relates back to the last point is that it's hard to study the brain. And so we know that, you know, character is going to be based in the brain, but, you know, we can do postmortem studies in humans and then we're looking at these soups of cells or we could look at the blood, but are the blood cells going to relate to different personality metrics. So you can assess personality metrics with psychiatric scales in live humans, but you can't look at their brain epigenome. And so we may get there eventually, but the challenges of likening the epigenome to behavior now are limited to where we can look at behaviors that a mouse might or rat may exhibit. Did I hear you correctly? You localized character? You say it's in the brain? There are various psychological scales to assess, you know, psychiatry is always trying to quantify, you know, how much someone is extroverted versus introverted. These are sort of, I guess, it depends on how you quantify character, but I may be using a definition slightly different from yours. But any psychological state may be assumed, perhaps, to be coming from the brain and as such, it's a challenge at least to study that aspect of it. Okay. Thank you. Go ahead. We're all so smart. As a practicing physician, I'm very interested in maximizing the health of my patients. What I really try to do is help them outsmart their genes, so to speak, and live the best healthiest lives they can in preventing chronic disease and illness, both in the mind and body. Wondering where you think environmentally, we can get the most bang for our buck? Is it food, which is biochemical, exercise, meditation? There's so much research out there. I'd love to hear from each of you, if you would, where we can really focus our attention in this fabulous field of actually influencing our own health. Thank you. All right. I'll start, I guess. So there's been a lot of work on the effects of various types of mindfulness-based meditation on depression, for example, and it's very, very efficacious for that based on meta-analysis. I don't know that people have necessarily looked at its effects on the epigenome so much, although using the transitive property of logic, we know that it will reduce your stress hormones and other endocrine factors that may reprogram your epigenome in positive ways. So I know that that's good, but I can't answer the question of what's best. I mean, I think that if you're generally healthy and you're also going to, I mentioned earlier that exercise and endorphins can increase brain-derived neurotrophic factor in these sort of mood positive factors that influence the brain in positive ways. I can't say whether that's better than meditation or not. I like to do both, I think it helps. And I know less about diet other than sort of what's known from the amount of methylation co-factors or full-8 B12 B vitamins that can sort of, those act as the bricks that the building blocks that your methylating machinery uses to methylate DNA. So if you're like grabbing for methyl groups and you're out of them, you're not going to be methylated. And those dietary factors are going to be important if you don't have them, then this could, in theory, cause problems. I mean, I think all those factors will influence the epigenome and they're good, but to quantify them is difficult. Yeah, I agree. I think that the environment factors definitely play a key role in the epigenomes. So we have a study on diet. We, for example, look at the vitamin folate. She hates affecting histone marks. We look at the yeast and the human cells. We show the strong correlations that the folate can affect the epigenetic marks, the histone modifications. So we believe, yeah, if you have a proper diet, it's definitely well, you know, can help the health of the patients. And this is terrible. I don't remember the details, but I do have colleagues in Houston that this is all they study is certain types of sprouts. They're not bean sprouts, but something similar to bean sprouts. And they see clear changes, beneficial changes in the methylation profiles and also protection against cancer. So you don't have to take folate pills. There are definite sources of food that are beneficial. And if you'd like later, if you give me your email, I can put you in touch with people. So I've always, because I work with mothers and their children, I'm a really strong advocate of social support as a way of modulating stress, reactivity, enhancing mother infant interactions and thus modifying the epigenome. And so I think social support in general is probably really essential. But that's more of a kind of a group level intervention rather than individual. So at an individual level, I'd probably be most influenced by the Columbia Center for Children's Environmental Health work, where they look at various pollutants in Manhattan and how they affect the brain, especially when they're experienced by mothers who are pregnant, but certainly not limited to that level of exposure. So one of the toxins we study is bisphenol A, BPA, that's made and it's used in the manufacture of plastics. So whenever you drink at a plastic bottle, you get BPA in your system. So I would try and reduce exposure as much as possible to that. It's an endocrine disrupting chemical. You get it when you touch grocery store receipts and it has epigenetic effects. So certainly and I think now they're certainly looking a lot more at thalates and other exposures as well that come from the various chemicals that we unfortunately are exposed to in New York. Okay. Oh, there's one more. Yeah, this has to do with Mother Infant Diads, a question about infant observational research. And much of the language that has been used that could apply at that macro level has used the word stress. And yet there are much more subtle sort of relationships that go on in the Mother Infant Diad then stress would seem to account for. So for example, in something called the social referencing paradigm at six months of age, you put a child on a visual cliff, that is it's a glass and there's a drop, but you can crawl across because there's a glass. And the mother stands at one end, the infant is allowed to crawl and the infant starts to crawl, gets to the cliff, what looks like a cliff. And then we'll crawl forward or not depending on the mother. In each case, the mother's asked to, asked the kid to keep crawling toward her. And some infants will look at the mother, be calmed by her expression, her encouragement and will continue across, will feel confident in her confidence. Her fears won't look or will look and will be too afraid to continue. That's at six months. A year later, there's a correlation between those six month old who followed their mother's instructions, trusted them enough to continue crawling and what's called secure attachment, which is I'm sure you know that's been measured in a variety of different ways. The same mothers, if they had been tested on the adult attachment inventory, that whole group of mothers at six months of pregnancy, we would have been able to predict from their responses on that inventory, which asks questions about their early relationships, we would have been able to predict what their 12-month-old children would be like on a measure of their security of attachment to the mother. So there are a number, and this is just skimming the surface, there are a number of very important findings in the infant observational research that pertain to the mother infant diet and the nature of the bond, really the individual difference in the bond. And somehow stress doesn't capture the subtleties of that. You guys are definitely talking about the biological mechanisms that underpin the kind of behavioral differences that are being seen in this kind of research, but is there something else that you could name besides stress? Is there some other, or do you find some way of translating stress into these subtle interactional differences in mothers and infants? Yeah, I think the bias in what we study and what has been studied in the field is based on what you can do in the lab and experimentally. And you can't look at these attachment relationships in the basic science models that we use in the lab. That said, there's probably, you know, what you're describing is the transmission of attachment security from one generation to the next. So there's probably some correlate to that, and certainly we see that the degree and reliability of mother infant interactions does transmit from mothers to daughters and rodent models, but we don't assess it obviously in the same way. We're looking at something that we can quantify the level of tactile stimulation. Right, but you look at licking and sucking and wrap pups. Exactly. So, you know, when we talk about stress, it's because it's something that is comparable. You know, we know about stress physiology, and in this model we know a little bit about it in humans. Whether what we're studying in these basic models can be applied, I mean, I certainly it could. It's just be operationalizing. What is it that we think is driving the epigenetic change in both generations and getting our hand handle on that? I think, you know, it's just the field is moving extraordinarily fast, you know, when you think of it comparative to other fields, but it's still very early doors, I think, for applying what we know in terms of the basic science to extrapolating to these kind of real social interactions in humans. But what you were saying about bringing in support, being helpful, really does translate to the macro level of certain kinds of interventions that you can do with these mother infant diets that have correlates at the biological level. Yeah. It's just why is there something other than stress hormones. Yeah. Yeah. Certainly. But I think we're probably uncomfortable going much further than that because, you know, when I look at a rat, it's not, you know, there's no social referencing. And there's, you know, so it's just that we want to keep it true to the models that we work with rather than going too far afield. Thank you. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thanks.