 Depends on the Associate Director of the Helix Center and welcome to today's roundtable entitled From Children's Sites to Our Insights, Ethiopian Children's Drawings, Stories and Interlives. But before I introduce today's roundtable participants, I'd like to update you on the activities of the Helix Center. Please visit our revamped website, www.helixcenter.org, expertly revised by our web wizard, Eric O'Hanlon. You can register there for notifications of upcoming events and to participate in our online discussion board. We're very pleased to announce receipt of a Templeton grant for the coming year in support of a series of 14 roundtables to be held over this and the following year entitled Science and the Big Questions roundtable series on the physical and spiritual world, the Brain Mind connection and human development and genetics. Our next roundtable is on Saturday, February 22nd, for the Biology of Mind, although it's on both Biology and Artificial Mind, and John Krakauer, Professor of Neurology and Neuroscience from Johns Hopkins, Gary Marcus, Professor of Psychology at NYU, Ken Miller, Professor of Neuroscience at Columbia, and David Rosenthal, Professor of Philosophy at CUNY, will be discussing this. So on today's program, I'd like to introduce our participants. Sitting in the middle is Theodore Shapiro. He's Professor Emeritus at the Weill Cornell Medical College and a practicing psychoanalyst, an adult child and adolescent psychiatrist. He's a co-principal investigator on a study of psychodynamic psychotherapy for children and adolescents with anxiety disorders. He has more than 200 scholarly and research publications, is author of seven books and was editor of the Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association from 1983 to 1994. He has received the Radow, Brill, Hartman, and Philip Wilson Awards and is a training supervising analyst at New York Psychoanalytic Society and Institute. To his right is Ellen Handler Spitz, honors college professor of visual arts at the University of Maryland, who writes, teaches and lectures on the visual, literary, and performing arts and psychology and on the aesthetic lives of children. Her background includes four years as a research candidate at the Columbia University for psychoanalytic training and research and in 2008 she was the Erikson scholar at Austin Riggs. She has an addition held residential fellowships at the Getty Center in California, Radcliffe Institute at Harvard, the Clark Institute, the Center for Advanced Study and Behavioral Sciences at Stanford, the Kamargo Foundation in France and the Rutgers Center for Children and Childhood Studies. She is a fellow of the New York Institute for the Humanities and the author of many articles, chapters and books including Art and Psyche, Image and Insight, Museums of the Mind, Inside Picture Books, The Brightening Clans, Illuminating Childhood, and Freud and Forbidden Knowledge which she co-edited. She has reviewed children's books for the New York Times and the New Republic and contributes regularly to art critical. Her work has been translated into Italian, Japanese, and Serbian and her most recent research focuses on art as illustration and on children's aesthetic lives. Nathan Schanberg, today's moderator, is the Wallerstein Research Fellow in Psychoanalysis of the San Francisco Center for Psychoanalysis. On the faculty here at New York Psychoanalytic and formerly Freud professor of psychoanalysis at the Hebrew University, he is the author, editor of four books and one novella, educating the emotions on Bruno Betelheim's ideas, lives across time with Henry Massey, reluctant warriors, the maturation and inner lives of elite Israeli soldiers, and Sheba and Solomon's return Ethiopian children in Israel, the foundational study for today's roundtable. He studied at the University of Chicago, both undergraduate and medical school, where his teachers included Bruno Betelheim and Saul Bello. He graduated from the St. Louis Psychoanalytic Institute and is training analyst of the Israeli Psychoanalytic Society and IPA. Nathan. Thank you to Helix, Rob, and for arranging this. When I was asked to do this, can you all hear? They put the mic on me. One of the attractions was to have Ted and Ellen be involved so that I could hear from them too. So this is, I've been looking forward to this for some time. The beginning of this project came from when I was working on Sheba and Solomon's return, which was a study, a three-year study of six-year-old children, Ethiopian children, and their families in a small town near Gaza in Israel. While I was at the Hebrew University, I would drive down twice a week to work and play and do research there. And the book is a description of what I learned about the children's inner lives, nature of their attachment ties, their parents' attachment ties, and their parents' backgrounds to give you a sense of the population. All of the mothers and fathers were born in rural subsistence agricultural villages in Ethiopia, in a pre-literate society. Very few of the parents, almost none of the mothers went to school and a few of the fathers were sent to two or three grades of school, but that was a big sacrifice for them to do. And most of the kids, the parents, I'm speaking of, were doing some sort of economically meaningful activity by the age of eight. So the boys had their own goats or sheep, they were shepherds, or one boy's job was to be both a shepherd and to keep the homodrias baboons out of his house because they would raid for food. And the girls would help out with the mother in cooking. And most of the fathers were involved in growing fava beans, little plots of land with a cow, in a very lovely sort of setting, small trees in a river nearby. Many of the villages they came from were half Jewish, half not Jewish, or all Jewish. Only one of the 46 mothers came from a disababa, that is from a major city. And all of these Jews were moved, I won't describe the details, but in a rather heroic evacuation during the turmoil in Ethiopia when I think 1.3 million people were killed by the Ethiopians. They were bought from the Ethiopians by the Israeli government, and I met the daughter of the ambassador in Ethiopia at the time from Israel who did the deal, and what the generals wanted for the Jews was guns, and he said, well I can't get you guns. They said, okay, money. He said fine, so how much? And they said so many million works about $12,000 a person. He said yes. And then he called his government and said I need so many million, they said we don't have it. They said, call the American Jews. So he got the money from some New York donors, and in a 72-hour window, cargo planes, which were completely emptied out, were flown in and flown out. And the reason for the 72-hour window, as some of you may know, is that Ethiopian government didn't want the Arab countries to know that they were exporting Jews to Israel. So it had to be done secretly and in that period of time. So the population that I lived and worked with, most of them were from that immigration in 91. However, us a new immigration or of the Falaschmura, of the Falasch Jews are those who were the Ethiopian Jewish Jews. The Falaschmura were forced, converted to Christianity under threat of death in the 1890s by the then emperor of Ethiopia. And they called themselves a penumbra population because they lived in the shadow of the Christian community and in the shadow of the Jewish community and felt didn't belong to either. It would be hard to marry off your daughter because the Christians thought you weren't really Christian and the Jews thought you're not really Jewish. So there was this sort of shadowy quality to this community. And they are currently coming in that with a new immigration into my town where I was working and that population actually looks quite different. I can describe that if we have time. But the fundamental question for today was when I meeting with kids, I spent three years with them and I was in this special after school program that was funded by the Wiesel family. Most of the kids were within walking distance from home started to walk home with them, spent time in the playground. All the kids invited me to their home so I could do formal assessments in the home and do attachment interviews and so on. The question is how do you, how does one learn from a kid? What do you think? What do you feel? What do you like? Who are you? If those are our questions, tell me about yourself. It would be the short version if we spoke with an adult perhaps. So for those of us who work with children, we learn other ways to ask that question. Usually not asking that question. But watching them play or playing with them, watching them play on the playground with other friends, sibs and so on or playing with them or asking to draw pictures. And there we have, I think both Ted and Ellen will talk about this, a limit developmentally. I have a limit because I just can't draw very well. But these kids, if you ask a four-year-old to draw a picture or a four and a half or a five-year-old or a six or seven-year-old, you have different developmental capacities and there are apparently gender differences in capacities so that the acute angle that you need to draw at A or a V or a W according to Gazelle, girls learn that sort of in boys in classroom. So there are variations on that. But once the child draws something, one can look at it, but how does one learn as much as one can about what's in the picture? And that's the second part, which is to ask a child, tell me a story about the picture and to put on exactly what the child does. So that's what I did and I'll show you a few examples of this and I use these pictures. There are other ways I use to assess the children, including an attachment to academic performance using the child behavior checklist. There are many other ways that I won't approach here that I read the book. But I use these to design a liquor type instrument to compare emotional life and a brief look at their developmental capacity from their picture drawing and their stories. So I'll give you some examples. I have about 300 pictures from the 46 children. I picked a few to show you and I think I'll just show you that. Tell you some of the stories and then I'd like to hand it over to Ted and to Alan to talk about the question of how do we learn about inner lives? What's the nature of visual representation? What's the nature of narrative representation? The both. So here's an example. I'm going to show you first the three pictures. In the book I had to limit the number of pictures significantly here. I'll show you three pictures from the same channel, one of our healthiest kids. And she draws a picture and as in the original the kids could pick colors, she did it as pencil. And she calls this girl Rudy. She says she's going to a dancing party. She's finished with the party. Had a great time and wanted to go next week. She has a job. She's a piano and music teacher. Five days a week she's a teacher and then she's at a party. If she'll be invited by the headmaster in her office. She's 18 years old, has blonde hair and a pony haircut. Now in Israel, pony haircut has bangs. I found out. The haircut covers her eyebrows and she has blue eyes. And I asked her at some point. I said blue eyes. She says, stum. She's wearing colored lenses. So you hear you have both the picture that if you just read the narrative but I tried to read it the way she told the story with that tone. The next picture. I have all this as children. All children are six years old. I'm sorry. In their summer six and a half and their summer six none are younger than six. There is one who's seven, for instance, but all the kids are six years old. So I'm asking this is what's called a house tree person. I asked her to draw a person. She draws a routine. Then she draws a boy. And she says this is Rudy's headmaster. He's also 18. Everything is similar to Rudy. Blue eyes, white skin. And so does Rudy. His name is Gil. His job is to be a headmaster in a high school. And he invites Rudy to be a teacher and come to party as well. He's her friend and they like each other a lot. And he likes dancing too. Rudy teaches him piano music. She is talented. And he looks like Rudy's brother. And Rudy loves her three-year-old baby brother. Gil is the prime minister's son. And he puts glass lenses, colored lenses, so that he'll have blue eyes. He is his aunt, no, his cousin. They met that kindergarten up to fourth grade and were in high school together. And they would very much like to be together in 11th grade. And then one more picture from this girl just to give you a sense of art. What happens with stories with one child? I can't do this for all the children, but it gives you a sense. I say draw a picture of a family doing something, kinetic family drawing. And she draws this very detailed, very careful. And then she tells the following story, which I'll read through a little more quickly than I should. Yes? A baby in bed, a mother and a girl. The baby is eight months and the family, everybody has blue eyes. And the daughter, Dina, always goes to parties because she's a dancing teacher. Dina has blonde hair with orange stripes and a pony haircut. And I ask orange stripes. She says she dies it on each side. They both have heart shaped earrings and the mother has the same hair color and they have round earrings like adults have. Their house is a palace. Now I ask the word she uses in Hebrew is palace. I ask her, tell me what a palace is. And she explained, is any house with a separate entrance and steps going inside? All these kids live in, looks like Soviet style apartment buildings with peeling stucco, just to give you a sense. This is imagination in your head. And almost every one of the kids, what we would consider, and even in Israel was considered impoverished. I had one family that was what we would consider upper working class. So these were quite poor families. They work in the factory mom and dad. They have the same job. They get a lot of money. When the parents are always working, the kids feel all right. They have brown eyes, the parents. The real color of their eyes is blue. The baby has blonde hair like his father and the mother is, the baby is mothers. When the baby is asleep, he gets a pacifier and a doll and the mother returns, she gives him a turnip, a baby bottle. Later he goes back to the doll and sleeps with it and he doesn't go to the daycare in the morning because mother has prepared him a surprise. You have to keep quiet so he doesn't wake up. He can fall from his playpen and hit his head. That can be prevented with a playpen that has a fence and the family bought the baby pen with a fence that can go up and down. And the story. Let me turn to an extreme, in the other end of a child that we thought was quite troubled. And I'll just show you one picture and one story. Here's this picture, same age. In his first picture, it looks like it and he describes it as a girl. This is a boy, his first picture is a girl. And the story is this. It's raining and then comes a son and then she, the girl, needs to bring her coat. She goes for a trip. She wants to still be on the trip because she has no home. Kids broke into her home with fire. It's better for her on the trip because she has no home. She's alone on the trip. Her children have homes to go back to and she doesn't. So she doesn't feel good. She wanted to burn down her house too. She did it because she wanted to go on a trip for a long time. No, she did it by mistake. She can't go inside the house because it burned down. She made her own colors and her hair because she wanted long hair. It's a real girl. Her name is Hannah. I know her. She's having fun. Now, this is a child on our scale. We rated the first girl someplace close to five, a very high score. This boy would be closer to one and a half, a child who we thought needed imminent treatment. Could you move back? Just go back to the previous one for a minute. Yes. What's happened? Just to, do you mind? Just to see the difference in the way that these children draw the figure. I want everyone to notice that the high functioning child draws the figure very much. How many people in these children's daily life actually have blonde hair and blue eyes? A percentage. No. Okay. Zero. So that's very interesting. It's Israel. I want to make that, I'd like everyone to be aware of that. That's a very important thing. This child is focusing on the blonde hair and the blue eyes, although the child has no actual experience of seeing people who look that way. So I think it's important to notice that. Although one of my students from the university pointed out that I have the closest thing to blue eyes that they've seen there. They have access to the larger culture. Absolutely. So they know, they're comparing themselves. This is an idealized. Yes. Absolutely. And one of the fathers complained to me that he doesn't raise his children. Israel culture raises his children. Okay. Just a parenthetically for those of you who may not know, testimony during Brown versus the Board of Education from Kenneth Clark, a psychologist, bore witness to the fact that black little girls preferred white baby dolls to black showing that separate but equal is not equal. So it is an interesting historical counterpart to idealizing the other rather than. It's very important to notice that the child is so young. This child is six years old. And this is nothing that was told to her by her parents. It was nothing that anybody tried to teach her. But it's something that she learned so profoundly that it's in her spontaneous story. Okay. Sorry for interrupting. But you're getting at the difference in the form of the figures. The drawing is here. The figure here is highly articulated. And the proportions of the figure are different. And the child is making an effort to give you some sense of the costume. Maybe Nathan, could you show the second one? Shoot to the family. I bring your mic up for one second. We have some problems with feedback. Do you want this one? Yes. I think that's because I think that it's very important to see how carefully the child has made an effort to draw these figures with necks, with arms, with hands, with belts distinguishing the different sections of the body. And the sizes of the figures are articulated. And now if we go to the next child's drawing, same age. It's very primitive. Let me show you the next one. I need to show you to give you a sense of that. I mean, one of the things that... Sir, may I ask you a question? Sir. Well... I think it's better that we hold the questions from the audience. Okay. Don't forget your question. Don't forget your question. But a way to begin to address what Ellen and I think Ted are pointing out in Ted will talk more about, I hope, is I used as a rough measure of looking at the form of the child gazelle score for the human figure. Here's a six-year-old boy drawing person. And you see... You see the look, right? Yes. I'll tell you the story in a moment, but just looking at it, Ellen, this is even more primitive than the previous. This is... Actually, this is very interesting what you show here because we know it's fascinating. We know that cross-culturally, the first image that a child of you gives the child the problem draw person. What happens is this. It's one closed form which represents some kind of confluence of head and body. Head is not distinguished from the body. It's one oval or circle or shape. One of which we find two eyes, sometimes... But usually eyes more than mouth. And the limbs protrude from that one shape. And the child will draw legs first. Only later will the child draw arms. But so the most primitive, earliest representation of the human form is this shape. And what's so incredibly fascinating is that the very child who draws this is the same child who, if you say to that child, what is this? The child will say ear. You say, what is this? The child will say nose. The child has the cognitive capacity to name all the parts of the body, or many, but when the child draws, the child will draw this. So we'll get into that later. I don't want to interrupt your presentation. This is fine. In the few minutes I'll show you the sequence, how that happens and so forth. These little primitive head feet think... Some people call them tadpoles. The Germans call them fuscupptions. Little footed heads. But just so... I can tell you the story it's written up there, but just so you know. That picture has one girl or two possibly, and the rest are all boys. The boys have all legs, no arms. The girl who has the crown around her, do you see her? Has arms. And the story about this, there's one other girl that's two persons over to the right. You see that with a little bit of a crown around her? So the only one figures with arms and there are women girls. And all the boys, the story he tells. So just the pictures alone we can read something from, but then listen to this boys story. And as you know, those of you who were children know, this is like a snapshot of the final product. If you watch the actual drawing of it and get a videotape, you see he's telling the story and he's drawing and drawing and drawing. As he's doing it and he says, this is a monster chasing him. That one with the girl with the arms. It's a kid, a girl, but she's a monster, a bad monster. She wants to devour someone. She eats boys and girls too. These are the roots of the monster, the stuff around the hair of the head. She has big teeth. She's angry because she hasn't eaten anything. And I ask, what happened to the boy? Because he's going to draw a boy. Oh, he ran and then a good monster came and drove her the bad monster away. Later another kid came and then another kid and ran away. Another kid. He's pulling on his tongue. He's licking his hand and he stops answering my questions and he's drawing pictures. Later at the very bottom, a big kid came and spooked the monster and she ran away. He's 27. He has courage. And later they carry him upwards. He licks his hand and he draws a lot of kids carrying the big kid because he killed the monster. That's his draw person. I'm thinking maybe I could just, I prefer to pause here and then, and here Ted and Alan take it from here. Is that okay with you? Sure. Why don't you go to my thing? I just want to tell you a bit about some studies that I did earlier on which have the developmental implications that we're talking about. That Nathan already mentioned the fact that we, can you find me? I'll go ahead. That we use drawings with children because sometimes it's easier to talk to them that way and you can talk about the drawings. We dare not take the drawings for being all there is because we want the inquiry about the drawings. We can tell from the form some things but we can't tell what the content means. It's a little bit like Freud's idea about dreams having manifest content and then latent content. You dare not use the drawing itself as the end. All it can tell you is something about the developmental process and what they're pulling it from. Go to the first one. We use all these techniques to get around talking directly to kids. This is the sequence that Ellen was talking about. Another top is eyes in the circle then the little footed heads and then as you can see the arms even come off from the head and it's only later that maybe something else goes on. Now what can we say about that from the standpoint of what is this the case? Why, if this is a projection and people suggest that the most important part of the head for an infant is the mouth. Why aren't the mouths there first? First of all we didn't know. I then did a study next slide which derived from the Good enough scoring method. The Good enough scoring method says that by three years of age you ought to be any of you body psychologists here can know. If you count, give a child 36 months and you count the number of features that it has you can add them all up and what three months for each item and then you add them up and you put them over their chronological age you get a rough estimate of IQ from this. So it does have developmental salience. It works up until about 12 years of age. You can get an approximation just from the form. You don't have to trust it but it correlates usually with something else. Next one please. Now along the way I and we do these little other figures that they're supposed to be able to do from two to seven. I then had a youngster who came from a very ache acidic family. He was somewhat challenged intellectually and so forth and I asked him to do a figure drawing. I wish I had the original there and he did the figure drawing which suggested that his mental age was not very good. But notice what's on his head. So now how does that fit into the developmental sequence? We have to add to all of the developmental propensities that salience in regard to the culture and what's there is also going to be added according to how much exposure they have which would be interestingly related to some of the things that he's telling you about this. I actually did a systematic study to see if indeed young children drew eyes and not mouths and sure enough it seemed to be true and we had good statistical findings. Go on. Don't bother. These are just the files. Okay. Now why eyes and a head from a biological vantage point? What is going on here? One of the things that Spitz showed us is developmentally at six weeks you get what they call a social smile. All you need to get a social smile is a full face and movement. You can pair that down by putting eyes on a balloon together and movement and you'll get the social smile. You mix those eyes up in different places. So what we have is a biological readiness for face recognition and social relatedness which always struck me as being a wonderful common factor in regard to three-year-olds. The three-year-olds are not projecting themselves. They're projecting the image of the other if you will at that moment. And it's only later that you begin to get the projective ideas that are being talked about here. Curiously on a biological level the representations are there are two areas of the brain which light up with face recognition. By the way, human beings are face experts. By the way, cross racially we're not very good because we don't have enough experience with it. But within racial groups, you know, that comes to the notion that people say when people of other races all look alike to them, that's not prejudice. It may indeed be something that is going on. So we're face experts. There's an area in the base of the brain called a fusiform area where this expertise is registered even at a biological level. Look at that. If you don't look at the eyes and the face as autistic children for example do not. They tend to look elsewhere. You realize this area is no longer used in the modular way that it was meant to for faces, for face recognition. If you get one of these kids who has obsessions as one of these Ari Klinn at Yale did, he studied a child who had a Pokemon craze. And he put Pokemon figures up there, that area lit up in the brain. So if you're a car nut, that's the area you're going to light up. So these are expertise differential areas that the brain subsumes in regard to this. Now on top of this we have all kinds of cultural issues of course once the child grows further. And we talked about the Clark study for the Brown versus the Board of Education. Go on, next one please. Now here's another area where salience becomes terribly important. This comes from a study that I did many years ago when I was at Bellevue NYU. I was asking an autistic boy who was probably eight years of age at that point to copy a square. He copied and he put those things and then he does these. The fact is in his day to day activity he was obsessed by wheels and spinning. Next one. Philip, he then incorporated it into his human figure drawings. Those are arms, those are legs. In the same way. So he didn't lose it. He kept it going because for him that was the essence of what he wanted to portray even in cooperating it into his new figure drawings. Next one. Oh, oh, there's a creative process that goes in. It's the kind of integration which goes on always. Here it is again, now he's a little more mature. Those look like pretty good stick figures and there's these circles. But notice the circles at the top very much mimic what we saw before. During the next year when his maturation was at his best and his language was beginning to get better. Next slide. This is what I got. Now these are pretty dynamic drawings if you look at it. He's doing a wheelie on his motorcycle and so forth. I just want to bring these to your attention that even though kids may be developmentally disabled or what have you, their capacity to represent themselves or others is a uniquely human situation but gets curtailed and modulated by the experiences that the child is capable of having because of some biological disability or because of some social disability. People who've studied figure drawings across nations and across cultures, if you don't have access to drawing materials, figure drawings are not a good thing to use because it isn't trained into their doing. In fact, what many parents do who have disordered kids and they realize they're doing developmental testing on them so they train them up to the task just like kids do SAT via studies and so forth which is unfortunate because that's not what this is all about. I just want to just highlight the idea of form versus function and salience in regard to content analysis in terms of what the meanings of these things may be. Here the meaning doesn't have a kind of psychodynamic but much more a developmental persistence perseverativeness from early on which they'll take this. There's so much pleasure in this drawing. Imagine the child enjoying making that. The function's looks look so great in the drawing. That's another element I think we have to factor in. As we go on I will show you some other stuff that I got from a use of drawings. Two studies, one was single consultation using what Winnicott called the squiggle game when you have nonverbal children and how complex it could get in regard to interpsychic variables. And then later on another study that we did, great traumatologist Bob Pineous was a resident at Bellevue at Cornell at the time. When we did a study of we learned that children of suicidal patients in the hospital were not really ever told the facts about their parent suicide for fear of exposure but the kids knew it. I want to show you some drawings from that. So I just want to keep that in advance. I was told that we were supposed to be speaking spontaneously and not to prepare a text. So I really haven't but I do want to say a couple of things. First of all, in regard to your work, first of all I'm just thrilled to be here on this distinguished panel and I want to say for those of you who don't know Dr. Shapiro, he has made major contributions to this field and if I would be a very rich lady, if I had a dollar for every time in the past decades, I don't know how many decades, I have recommended his paper on the child age plus or minus seven. What is the exact- Six plus. No, seven plus or minus one. It is, if you don't know this paper, it's absolutely marvelous and I recommend it not just to students but to teachers, parents, everyone. So I'm very thrilled to be here. I know just to go back to Nathan's presentation, it's very interesting what you did, that you had the child do the drawing and then you asked the child to tell the story after doing the drawing and the focus was very much on the story. Now how different is it we might ask ourselves for the child to do a drawing herself or himself and tell a story about the drawing that he or she has just made and to tell a story about a drawing that somebody else has made. How is that different from telling a child a story and asking a child to illustrate a story that the child has heard or to ask a child to tell a story and then do a picture related to the story. Now those questions that I'm asking, I'm asking them with malice of forethought because I think that after the drawing is made, the drawing stimulates ideas in the child that were not there when the child made the drawing. Therefore, that has to be, it seems to me, a part of the research. It's very different. The temporal sequence here is, I think, is important. I also think it's extremely important the context in which a child draws. Heidegger has a famous paper, George from the origin of the work of art in which he conceives of the work not as a drawing but as the work of the drawing, the process of the drawing. And I myself in my work am very interested in that, in the process by which the child draws. You give a child drawing implements. And you know in Darfur when there were all of the horrible genocide going on in Darfur, the human rights workers were interviewing the parents. The children were there. And just to keep the children busy and quiet, the front of the French workers gave the children some drawing materials. Children began to drop. They weren't told to do a drawing. They just drew. The drawings are stunning because the children drew the atrocities that were going on. Uninhibitedly they drew blood and death. And they even developed an iconography for it. So when you had a human being turned upside down, that was a dead person in the iconography that these children spontaneously evolved. But the children did the drawings without being told to do anything. We saw guns. We saw, I gave a lecture on this at the Sperdiss Institute in Chicago shortly after this. I got hold of this drawing. If you tell children, draw a boy or draw a girl, draw a human being, you are giving a task to the child. And part of what the child will do, I think, is to want to please the adult. In the same way that we have this problem with every kind of questionnaire that's given, where the person answering wants to please or do something appropriate or something acceptable. But I think that's very different from the child who gets something. And then we want to ask why. When you give a child drawing materials and the child starts to draw, why is the child drawing? What is the impetus for that? So in the literature, there are two schools of thought about that. The schools of thought are matching and marking. So you have scholars who say there's just a desire to make a mark. You know, kill or I was here. You make your mark. And then there's a school of thought that the idea is to represent something. Draw something that looks like something, that represents something. As we see, for example, in Lesco in the cave paintings. And there's a division about which of these impulses is primary. In the psychoanalytic literature, there's a brilliant paper by Ernst Chris, who's a great, not only a great psychoanalytic writer, but he was an art historian at the Kriśtus Dorsches Museum in Vienna. And it has this amazing paper. It's not in his book, Psychoanalytic Explorations in Art. It's not. It's in the psychoanalytic study, The Child, I think. And in this paper, he describes a little boy at the easel. I think it's a boy, I think, but it doesn't make, it could make absolutely no difference to you, a girl just as easily. And the child is taking paint and brush and making wonderful marks and just the pleasure of putting the paint on this paper is the impetus, impetus. And Chris describes it, and then at a certain point, the child looks at what's there. And the child takes a color and puts something on the page in response to what is actually there. And in that moment, Chris suggests this is the moment when art is born. This is the moment where you begin to have an artist because the artist isn't just enjoying the smearing and the fun of the materials. The artist is actually making what we're using ego functions of judgment and developing skill to try to make something that pleases him cognitively, intellectually, aesthetically. So I don't think we have to choose, but when we think about children's drawings, I think we may want to ask ourselves about these questions of marking and matching. The second point I want to make, which is another big, huge conflict in the literature on children's drawings, is the question which really bears on these two, both of your presentations. The presentation that you gave Nathan, where we see these children who are exile children coming to Israel from Ethiopia in a new land with all kinds of problems of immigration and so on, attachment which was then the perspective that you brought. Yeah, I call you Ted. Where you talked about the scientific, the universal kinds of issues. So there are certain scholars who say the children will draw because this is how it is. This is the biological necessity to do certain things. Other people will say absolutely not, but children are drawing its profoundly conditioned by the cultural context in which the child draws. And I see these two perspectives as, there's a lot of fighting in the literature about this, but I don't think we have to fight about it. I think we can simply see that it's a huge mistake to just talk about what's lighting up in the brain without understanding the culture. Ellen, I have a parallel comment about that that may be related to. That human beings, whatever culture they are, whatever language is spoken, speak a language and fairly competently by three years of age is a human issue. Whether you speak English or German depends on what your mother took, spoke to you. So that's a parallel notion. The capacity to do it is one thing. What you do and what its content is. It doesn't solve a third issue, which is the issue of why is it that the child takes so much longer to draw what the child can articulate, describe, and say. Once again, there are a lot of theories about this. A great root of Aernheim has a theory about this, but we know that every child by three can name every toe and every finger and so on, but the child will not draw that. I think that's probably a matter of maturation and biological integration. In fact, one of the questions that comes up, I showed you, the head end of the organism is highly put together in the beginning of life. Development goes from the head down, Cephalocore. The child doesn't even appreciate too stimuli, for example, if you touch a hand in the face, they won't appreciate the hand until they're pushing towards six. All of these are newly integrated aspects of it. They don't represent the middle of the body, you'll notice, but they represent the hands and the toes, which is just the way the brain is organized. If you look at the sensory strip, the thumb has a huge area of that brain compared to what the middle of the body. If you use something as simple as two-point discrimination on your finger, you can get it a millimeter away. You'll get two points. You do it on your back. You can get three inches, and they won't feel two points. There is a maturational aspect of this, I think, which is involved in control of the pencil to do the thing, which is different from how wonderfully language apparatus is. Remember, the first year is nonverbal. Infancy means without speech. Then all of a sudden, between one year and three years of age, you become a one-word person to a well-articulated seven-word sentence phrase, representational stuff. The language apparatus is much more maturationally available to you than the representational thing. The only people who's, the only creatures on Earth who not only speak and think in language of that sort, but also write and represent themselves. I also think that there is a brilliant kind of symbolism in these early drawings that they are somehow, the child shows what's important in a way that Picasso famously said, it's taken me years to learn to draw like a child. There's a certain way in which the child gets down when the child is left to do it. Why did you say in use of a wonderful phrase, trained up for it? Well, the child isn't trained up for it, but when the child is left, the child has a way of getting down in the simplest way what really matters. That drawing was amazing. That drawing was the scooter bicycle thing. So I think that's also a part of it, that there's a certain beautiful simplicity with all the little details that we learn sort of shunted aside because they're not what matters. I wanted to tell you that, Ellen, as you were talking, I was looking for one example that I don't have here, but you mentioned how as a child is drawing things happen, change, and influences what happens next. I wanted to give you one example of that. One I wanted wasn't here, but I'll find it is, again, in asking the child to do a house tree person, a family drawing, we get to see picture picture picture. So here, for instance, this is one girl, happens to be seven. So she does a person. We know she can draw a person. It's not maybe very clear, but there's a stick person with a fancy head. Then another person, next to it, she can draw the person. She can draw a tree. She can draw a house. And then I asked her to draw a picture of a family doing something, and she does that thing up there on the right hand side. Do you see it? So, and very careful and detailed. And I said, tell me about this. And she says, the two light purple balls, which are at six and nine o'clock, and there are two dark purple balls at twelve and three o'clock. I think you can see the colors and differences. And then she says, the vertical yellow line connects the light and dark balls, that's at twelve and six. And then there's this line drawing horizontally between three and nine o'clock. She's going through this very carefully. And then she explains that these lines keep the balls apart because if they get too close, they explode. So here you have something else that's crept into. This girl can draw figures, and this is her kinetic family drawing, and the answer is, this is her kinetic family drawing. Family therapists talk about trying in families, this is a drawing of it. But another more profound example was a boy who drew very tiny figures. A boy, really tiny in the middle of a big page, only pencil, no color. And then he does a tiny tree in a tiny house, and then I say, no, and not draw a picture of a family doing something. And he looks, if I'm you, he's looking at me during the pencil, it's pointed and poisoned the air, and then he goes like this. Looking up in the corner over there, and my student from the university is sitting there ready to take notes, and nothing's happening. And I ask, do you understand what I mean by a family doing something? And the student says, do you know what a family is? And he goes, and he goes like this. So this boy says something in what he doesn't do. That is something about the family for him. Let's say, interferes with his, what he can do, which is to draw figures. So this is so important. That's what I'm interested in. I'm very interested in that. I'm interested in that, in the child taking time, not doing something. And also, what does the child draw first? So you have a family. Which figure does the child draw first? Does the child draw the father first? Does the child draw himself first? And where are these figures placed? And which ones are close? Which ones are far away from each other? But I really think it's dangerous, or not dangerous, that's too strong a word. But I think it's maybe irresponsible to put too much, I think you said this, to put too much weight on any thing of this kind. It's only useful when it's in the context, in a much larger context. And what I think we really can't do is to treat a child's drawing as we would treat a complex work of our, you know, a statue by Bernini or a painting by Rembrandt. A child's drawing is something else. It's something which is spontaneous. It does have psychological content. Indubitably, it does. But I think that it needs a great deal of context before it can be said to have any kind of definitive. Does that make sense to you? Why one does a study as I did over three years with these families? But that's also why you ask them to draw something and then you use it as a vehicle to then probe ideas that you might have asked directly because you know if you ask it directly, you're not going to get the same rich experience that you got or the kind of creative aspects that we're talking about. Maybe it's, let me show you two images. Push ahead. More. Down further. Further further. More. More. There we go. Okay. Go one more. And then I'll go back to this because this is, okay. This came from the study that I mentioned before of kids whose parents were hospitalized for suicide attempts. And we used only drawings as a starting point. We didn't ask them about anything. And one of the things we became aware of as if the parents lied to them about what they were doing, while everything was perfectly evident, and then many of the kids knew, in fact, even knew when the parents were doing. This is a drawing of a youngster who drew his father, who was in the hospital, who had slashed up his neck and his wrists. And those are direct representations of his father's bandaged hands and his father's straggly beard, which was covering up everything else. Now there the manifest content is smashing in relation to its immediacy. But the further inquiry was to realize that there's more behind this. We knew he realized that we knew it was there, and so forth and so on. No matter how many people lied to him, at least we had some evidentiary base that this is his acknowledgment of it. So there the manifest content is useful to us. But it's not, didn't tell us what he was thinking, feeling and what have you. By the way, one of the outcomes of this study, which was then advanced later on at other places, Bob became a great student of trauma. He interviewed a lot of kids who was one parent killed the other right in the police station and used these drawing techniques. I just wanted to tell you about how useful it is. Go one back now. Okay. Let me tell you the background of this because I'm going to get to this drawing. It was a little girl, very shy, very tiring, five years of age. Her father, a surgeon, had brought it to see me many years ago. The family had suffered a loss. A relative of theirs had lost two children and a mother in a fire in a country home. And she knew about it, etc., and was having, wasn't sleeping very well. Well, her father brought her into the office after I had gotten some history and so forth from them separately. And she was very shy. She was hanging behind her father. She wasn't going to talk and so forth and so on. So I let them both come into the consulting room together. And I realized I wasn't going to get very far with her. I started peppering her with questions or doing anything. So I took a stack of paper and I said, I just read Winnicott and Winnicott has something called a squiggle game. You make a little squiggle and they finish it and then you take another sheet of paper and then we go further. We must have had 15 squiggles in the midst of it. I was brave enough to ask her father to go out. And he goes out and she stayed with me and she loosened up and she began talking about things. And Winnicott talks about when things become precongous. And anyway, along the way there's a lot of stuff. Until finally she gets to her being very fond of parties and parties which have this kind of represent they snoopy parties and so forth. And then her brother she said was having a party where there was a fireman theme. So I picked up on that and I said I heard that there was a sad fire in the family and there was a sad fire in the family. Okay, she says, yes, I said that they died so she spontaneously now tells me without my asking her about it. You know the sister did get out so there's some repair in the fact that not everybody went. I look at my daddy's surgery book. Now where did that come from? So you pay attention to the associated path and so forth as to what's going on. Now she had made reference to her father being a surgeon and he put people to sleep with what she calls sleepy air. And by the way, she remembers she has a sleep disturbance. I looked at my daddy's surgery book and the pictures of them doing dog surgery. My mother and Amy, these are fictitious names, had their appendixes out. Where does this come from? You sit there amazed as to where, what's happening here? Okay. I said, your mother and Amy, she said, well they only had to take it out if it's infected and you cut a hole in a blanket and then you're asleep. I saw my mother scar. I hear she's going on. I said, maybe you'd like to draw it. That's a picture. If she says to me, what if it comes out looking like a child? I'll leave it up to you as we go along to make the inferences. Okay. I said, do it as you like to do it. She draws and says, the oval part of the scar is what I'm going to show and she has a ponytail too. I said, you have one too because she had a long, she looked at me disdainfully. She said, it's a braid, not a ponytail. And then she says, my hair is as long. No, it's longer than my mother's. And then we went on to something else. Okay. What has this got to do with the loss of those two kids? Her not being able to go to sleep. Her father being a surgeon and whatever is going on with her about the marvel that while someone sleeps, his father makes holes in their body. And then juxtaposed to that as a long ponytail to make up for it. Adepish medapists. So, I know what she is. But five. So, she's, to me, the most absolutely. By the way, you notice she has the flipper arms of the other child. Very common thing. But she has five fingers on it. That she, that she sneaks that remark. The appendix, something is going to come out. Supposed it looks like a child. I mean, that's absolutely stunning. That is stunning. And it's so, it's so real. I mean, children, that's exactly the kind of thing a child would think, would say, would imagine what could come out. We know it comes out of mommies. Oh my God. And the drawing is, and it's interesting, you know, what, one thing interesting about the drawing when you look at it is that you have to remember also aesthetically how do children learn to draw? This is again going back to this remark about the culture. Look at the nose. That little upside down you is a convention for doing a nose that some children learn by looking at some picture books that have that as a convention. We've all seen that. So certain, certain mannerisms in the drawing, when you're interpreting, if you are in interpreting it, you have to remember that children will develop mannerisms that come from the culture. And that is definitely a mannerism. We can't assume that the mother who knows it looks anything like that. That's simply probably every drawing, that will be the way the nose, this child will draw the nose. Another child will draw the nose with a flat line or a straight line or a u that goes the other way. We have about 15 minutes remaining, so I thought maybe it was time to open up for questions from others. Is that okay? The blonde child, how do you determine the ability of the person drawing, the child drawing against his or her creativity or individuality? Then you've got another picture, the artist show that girls with arms and boys without arms. Would this not be imagination running faster than the ability to draw, to get it down. The girls came first, I think. No? All right, then I'm wrong about let that go. But one thing that runs through what I have heard today, as it seems to me, you're making an assumption that drawing ability of all children of the same age or to be the same or is the same. Not at all. Well, that's what I mean. Not at all. I think that's what Ted was laying out here. But in fact, I didn't take all the time, I didn't want to take all the time I should, but part of the study in the book is we looked at how very different developmental capacity for drawing was at the same age. That's the advantage and that's why I chose to look only at six years of age. But go ahead, something else you wanted to ask her. Yeah, just a couple of quick points because they all are around the same issue. It's not what I heard, by the way. Read the autistic child and the bicycle. I don't know how many people in this room could draw that bicycle as stunningly as this autistic. That child has artistic ability. I mean, I certainly couldn't do it. And then the idea of, well, you went into this which came first, the drawing on the other. So the bike and the, where was the family? Oh, yes. The abstract drawing of you told her to draw a family. That abstract with the dots, so the yellow line and so on. In this case, what I see, and I'm not a professional, but what I see, is in the bike, the artist, or the youngster has extraordinary drawing ability, capacity, even though he's artistic. And as far as the child who did the abstract family, think of the abstract ability of that child far beyond her age, far beyond her age, to be able to contemplate such a representation of her family. Well, anyway, that's what I wanted to say. Could I respond to the first two, to your first point? Because I'm so glad you made that point. I think that I was sort of, when you started, I knew, I kind of knew where you were going with that. Because I think it's really important. So what you're suggesting is that that image, which I plead guilty to calling primitive, what could in fact be an amazingly creative expression on the part of the child who could have possibly drawn the figure in other ways. And I think that's very, very important to keep in mind. And the cognitive ability, the ability to draw something, is something which you did, is trained up. It is something that is trained up a child, and is rewarded. The parent will say, oh, wow, when a child does it correctly, like coloring in the lines on the coloring book. These are things that the culture is rewarding. But a child who does it in that magical way, like the bicycle or the other way, that child might not be rewarded. And it might not be right to call it primitive. It might be right to call it something else. So I really, I appreciate that so much. And I plead guilty and I stand corrected. And I think that's a wonderful contribution. Thank you. If I'm going to add one thing, I have a granddaughter who's going to be three, but I, she's a little over two and a half, because the right time for the system, anyway, she loves to draw. She can't draw to save her life. I mean, you know, she can't, she just scribbles. But give her stickies, the stickons, and she will create a montage with an oddest sensibility, you know, an equal number of horizontal followed by an equal number of vertical or a circle. And it has four. So we have about ten minutes. So to get an idea so that you all know how many questions there are, perhaps as Rob suggested, those who have questions, if you would step up and line so we know how many people have questions, then you can keep that in mind when you ask your own question. There should not be a war between the artists and the humanists here. I mean, this is not that I'm not against creativity. I just want to know what aspects of capacity with developmental achievement. There are people who have very different abilities to be sure to be creative. I'll tell you one point where you hit a lot of tension between those who wish for and foster creativity and the kids in another camp. You get six and seven year olds, you tend into art school, everybody wants them to be terrifically creative. You know what a six and seven year old wants? Control of the medium. So he can make it work for himself in the way in which he wants to. Also there's a tension between our encouraging, you know, the artistic. Go ahead. Thank you so much for your good work in coming out today. And sometimes I've been a teaching artist early childhood education. So first of all, you might find it interesting anybody here that I have a video up on YouTube where five year old kindergarten kids from Inwood say no adults left behind. They sit in their little kindergarten chairs and they ask each other questions about life what makes you happy, say, why do people like, cheat and fight? And the five year old spontaneously, no adults in this have better answers than most adults. So my question is going back to as Alice Miller who I greatly admire, she's one of her main ideas was emotion attaches meaning to experience. If there's no emotion, there's no way that anybody can create meaning and understanding and of reading, writing experiences got to be an emotion. When it comes to education, emotion is left out like it's the plague. So for a five year old and I'm still like a recovering five year old in my own life, it is like all the emotionality is that if my mommy and daddy scream yell and fight like some of these things with from Ethiopia, it must be because I'm a monster. And that's like the emperor's new, you know, the P under the 20 blankets of saying I am a horrible and my whole life is predicated, I'm a monster. But to use this because language hasn't evolved yet, but when it comes to like primary and basic education, institutionalized education rather than just somebody who has a psychiatric problem that you have lots of experience credentials that these kinds of ideas to help a child emotionally express the feelings that lead to meaning and understanding, but in a way that is connected with the development of the brain. Do you see positive things about how these things could be introduced into everyday education in the classroom rather than making a five year old be a grown up adult when he's five? You know, I mean, is it something you're doing? You're taking action on or, you know, how would that, what you're doing? This is my, I'll finish up here. Compliment, you know, the push to get a five year old to read and write. Okay. I think you have articulated a wonderful new topic for the healing foundation, but we couldn't possibly address it in this, it's a huge problem in America today. And not just in America, but in China and India and everywhere. It's a huge problem. You're addressing something enormous, sir. What I'm just saying. We're asking you for addressing it, but I don't think we can answer it yet. I'm also motivating you all who have credentials, who are greatly admired to maybe take the initiative that you can do something about this and make a difference in the lives of hundreds of children. You can do it. But it takes people like you to take the initiative. And I greatly, you know, in the name of children, you know, I'm sorry. Thank you very much. Thank you. I'm not going to move to you, I just maybe just a supplement to this. The program that I worked in, I chose very carefully in Israel. In general, the Ethiopian kids are integrated into all the public school systems, but the public school systems in Israel, the classrooms are 35 to 38 children. I can't even begin to understand how they do that, but the kids learn, they're really smart and they do well academically. When the Weizels were asked when they wanted to do something significant in Israel, and the Weizel used his Nobel Prize money to do this, he specifically set up an after school program for Ethiopian kids only in two communities, Ashkelon, the one that I was in in Kiyah Malahi. And the focus on the program was on academics, reading and writing. These parents who are illiterate or pre-literate, it's very important to them that their kids learn to read and write. And to get ahead in Israel, you need to read and write. And the focus in the program really is helping them with their academics. They do it in a remarkably warm way. The classrooms are 18 children, or 15 children, or 17 children. And I chose of all the classrooms, I picked one where I thought there was a teacher who was really very connected with the kids and effective. So the teachers did say, when I asked, I took the kids out to draw, I was the picture doctor, they called me from Jerusalem. They would sometimes be surprised at what the kids revealed. First they didn't know that was going on in the family, or they might have known, but they didn't know the details. So they were surprised at what the kids could reveal with that. So that can maybe supplement or compliment what their work was. But it was clearly important, and I support what they were doing, that the kids should learn their academics. And the kids enjoyed it. I had the pleasure of writing a blog for Nathan's book. And one of the things that hasn't come out today, and you ought to read it, is that most of these families were traumatized. And whatever they were doing there must have come through in some of these drawings here or there and so forth. The women were forced into marriage when they were teenagers. The second thing is that they were immigrants from a culture which was persecuting them and then they were here and they found this place to live and bring up their children. So there's a lot that's not being told about this that you ought to learn somewhere else. But I just want to... I think three or seventeen plus or minus two short questions. One has to do with... I really thought your discussion was very stimulating. One had to do with the relationship between the drawings and the writings. The stories. The stories seemed to be, as you... And none say them, were very sophisticated. They seemed like they were pretty... They weren't in any way illiterate. They were pretty sophisticated. So I was curious about the relationship that you perceived having to do with that. The second question is somewhat related and it had to do with the extent to which these drawings or stories have a therapeutic value in and of themselves. Right. The third is a little bit more... That's a question. The third is a little more of a comment and I was very impressed that I am with the international relation, the global and comparative cultural differences that exist. And I think they have pretty significant. Because there are stick drawings that kids in Africa use because they haven't seen sort of... They can use photographs as well or three-dimensional because they haven't seen them. They haven't seen airplanes, well now they do maybe. But they're more familiar with cartoon stick drawings. Anyway, those are the two main questions. The second one I'll start with is the therapeutic quality. One of the things that comes out in our work and tend to refer to it is to a Winnicott squiggle game is that it's hard as a doc to not try to do something that's helpful, even if you're supposed to be diagnosing. Or I was trained in developmental assessment by Sally Provens and Sally's emphasis to us is to help the child do the best he or she can. You want to get the best picture that can do. Not literal drawing. So yes, but if I'd come in as a therapist, many of the parents would have been skeptical of me. In fact, one of the conditions of my doing the research by the parents, I could see the kids I could draw, I could tell stories, I could come to the homes, I could do no testing. No IQ, no projective, nothing like that because they were specific about this. They were worried that the Israeli government would get the information and would do something to their kids. So that's a subversive quality. The first question is a more complex one as I recall it. And that is I had over 300 pictures that the kids did in stories and it varied the nature of the story versus the picture, the richness of complexity, depending on the kid and so on. And I had kids who would start saying I don't know how to draw a person. And I said that's okay. Then they drew a person. This stuns me when I see this happen. So my sort of unsatisfactory answer is it depends when it comes to the relationship between story and drawing. Let me think, I think there are others can answer that. I want to think about that. I would like to relate this gentleman's question to this gentleman's question because I think those two questions really can be brought together. The second, your second question and your question. I think there is inherent therapeutic value. When a child is given a chance to express herself or himself, this is inherently in a constructive kind of way with drawing materials, with singing, with dancing, with writing a poem or with when a child has those experiences, it is inherently therapeutic. I was the Erickson scholar at Austin Riggs in Stockbridge and one of the most wonderful things in that community, which is an inpatient center, is that there are all kinds of places for patients to do drama, to do artwork, to do all these things. The person who was really responsible for that was Joan Erickson, who was an art therapist, who did not believe in interpreting the content of the drawing, but who believed in something so amazing. She said, let's bring an artist, a practicing artist, a sculptor, for example, into Riggs and give the sculptor a studio and let the sculptor work and let patients come in and just be there with the sculptor and talk to them and interact with them and then they can have materials and they can do this work. So your point about what's good in education for kids and your point about is it inherently therapeutic are very easy to bring together. These are activities that we are not giving priority to and what you said Nathan is so true. Parents are so terrified that children won't make it in the world, that they won't be able to make it in the tough world out there. We have to test them and prepare them and give them what we think they should know. What's really growing the whole person, Jerome Brunner, who is 98 years old now, wrote an amazing book called The Process of Education. He believes that the child constructs the world as did Piaget and we need to let the child construct the world and we need also to let the child take risks. We're so ready to step in. Parents, they are so ready to step in and not let the child take risks. I just published a little paper on creativity in childhood and it's very important to, I don't believe it not being safe, but I believe that we should let a child figure out something. And if it's a little bit risky sometimes because that's the only way, not just in art, but in other areas too. So I think those questions do come together. It's four o'clock and Rob said we could run over a bit. We go to the port there. For 30. Oh, we have time. Okay. We have time. Go ahead. Thanks for an interesting talk. What I found fascinating what I was thinking about was in your experience have you worked with kids who, when you give them the pencil and paper or the crayon and paper, if they draw outside of the boundaries of the paper, I found it fascinating that all the kids respected the medium so much that they stayed within the confines of the paper. And I wonder if the paper was larger or if it was a circle instead of a square or a triangular paper, how much it would influence what they would draw or feel that they could draw. If you say draw a house, what the paper was circular, what would happen. And I can't recall, I'm a child psychiatrist, but I can't recall giving even a young child pencil and paper or crayons and them drawing outside of the boundaries. And I'm just wondering if you guys had that experience and what do you think that means about that child? Well, I can tell you I worked at the Edelson Center for Child Research, this kids who are from my children. I'm a little boy that I wrote about this, I wrote an essay about it, but this little boy had no sense of boundaries. Everything, the paint went over onto the table, it went over onto him, it went into his mouth, it went everywhere. Actually, he was so in the material and it was in a way, it was okay because he really needed that. And I think you're getting at something which is again, this is the control that we put. Where are the boundaries that we want to give to the child? I mean, I think big is good. I think giving a child in a wall or a huge having kids, I've done this with kids because I've actually done a lot of work with, you know, giving them paper on the floor and letting them draw something big. I think big is important. Children need that, they need the big to draw, say everything so, it's very constricting to draw small all the time. Big is good, I think, for many children. Children are afraid of that, it was good to move them out of their comfort zone. The comfort zone is to do what the grownups want. But sometimes, and the thing is the teacher has to not be afraid. Teachers are the ones who are afraid. The teachers are afraid of the children. The teachers are afraid of what will come out of the child. I wanted to show you, I don't know if there's time, but I wanted to show you the drawings of the Children of Tarasian, the concentration camp that the Nazis made in near Prague. Children the children did drawings there. The teacher was a Bauhaus artist. She was, her name was Fiedel Dicker Brandeis. In the Bauhaus, it was universal arts, architecture, furniture design, fabric design, drawing, painting, sculpture. Everybody studied there had to try everything and do everything. And she worked with these kids who were separated from their parents living in separate houses. I don't know how many of you, are all of you familiar with what went on in Tarasian? I feel bad because my work, I didn't only brought the, probably just the ones that everybody knows. But, um, should I show them? Should I, should I, should I, I don't know if I should do. Are you interested to see them? No, I, I just have a few, I have a few of the drawings, but they're in, we put them onto the- We're going to transfer, huh? How about if we do this? Ted wants to show one picture of his question of boundaries. Yeah, that's wonderful. Then we can transfer over. I just wanted to show you this because it may relate to your question. I did a study once of kids' conceptions of growth, so I had them draw a ghost. This was the most elaborated ghost I've ever seen. Most of them are very slim and narrow, so, but this kid, I mean, you know, what you put down on the page is an overflow of, it has nothing to do with what a ghost looks like to him because later he drew a ghost from me. It has to do the feeling aspects of it. So yes, this is all of the unarticulated explosive aspects of his anxiety and fear and so forth and so on. So if you want a representation of that, I do want to make one comment on education. You know, there have been, I know in a group like this, we're all very touchy-feely. There have been movements in education which want to teach for the whole child and the creative and so forth. There's the Dewey movement, there's the Montessori movement, there's the Rudolf Steiner movement and so forth and so on. What's happened in America is a backlash against that kind of education which started with Sputnik in our competition with the fact that we weren't getting our, our math is not as good as it is in China. So we have a highly competitive, learn the three R's and then we can go on to who's creative. But not everybody's make greater. So that's an artifact of our culture, not the aims of education. So I just want you to. And then when I listen to Alan, my thought is, and your question about boundary, I worked in Israel, the schools are not very rich, for me to get clean white paper was a big deal. I brought my own finally. I brought my own crayons because it was too, and I know how to get crayons that don't break. No, no, seriously, you can get this kind of, I learned this from Sally Provence, this thickness crayons, they don't break. All sorts of little tricks like that. So maybe this would be optimal in certain settings, you know, to have different shapes, paper and different sizes. But for me, to have each kid have a ream of clean white paper and crayons that weren't broken was a big deal. And I still have. I had several, actually they were drawing pencils that they're like this thick and I sharpened them each time before I saw the kids and so on. And I had a sharpener there in case they broke it. I mean, those are the little practical things. But the other is, I hear Alan talking about helping a kid express whatever spontaneously is coming to him and helping that as a process to work it through. That is an important part of the process. My job was a different one, which is to ask each child of 46 children, tell me about yourself. Most of my kids also did spontaneous drawings, which I, some of which I included in the book. But in order to compare one child to another, I wanted to make sure that each kid drew the same picture. So I did that, unguilty of that, same draw person. By the way, most of the kids enjoyed doing that. Very few objected to it. So your questions are interesting ones and you could pursue that yourself and see how it comes out. In terms of boundaries, my experience, and it may be similar to what Alan is describing, that it's my more disturbed kids who go outside the boundaries of the paper. Most kids stay inside it. You could say some of the more disturbed kids are very constricted and stay right in the middle, but really disturbed kids are the ones that went beyond the paper onto the table. And none of these kids were that disturbed. Do you want to go down on your... I can't make it... Here you go. Other questions while Alan is showing up for pictures? I want to go back to the full screen. Okay. Any other questions? I can't get it to the full screen. By the way, there's copies of Alan's book and my book available afterwards for those who want to. Fine. You can't make it do this. Can I get it to the full screen? No, that won't do that. No. I don't know what it's doing. One thing I'm really bad is technology. Do you want to present something more? She's setting that up? I need to. She's got it. She's got it. Come. Two just can't get through the full screen. I just can't get... I'm trying to get it to the full screen. Bottom on the right. This... Oh, here. Bravo. Brilliant. Thank you, my dear. Thank you so much. Thank you so much. Okay. I think we need to have some left... Is there any way to get less light? Because... Or I guess now... Let's go ahead, Alan, because we'll spend so much time there. Okay. All right. So the Nazis created a concentration camp outside of Prague, which had been a fortress which held a relatively small number of people. And the Germans began to import... To bring Jews there. They took everybody out. They brought huge numbers of Jewish... Czech Jews there, including a lot of children. It was a place where there were a lot of artists, a lot of writers, musicians, composers. When you go to the archive, you're astonished by what went on in this camp artistically. But what happened was Frito-Dooker Brandeis, who was a Bauhaus trained artist, one of the very few women artists in the Bauhaus, was eventually captured with her husband and brought to this camp. When she got to the camp, she decided to separate it, of course, from her husband. All the men and women were separated. She decided to devote herself to the children. She lived in one of the girls' houses. The girls in her house were 12 to 14 years old. She decided to teach them to help them draw, to give them art, because the Nazis had forbidden school. So they couldn't do any formal learning, but they could do music and art. They didn't think that was very important. So, of course, the children could do that. What did she do for materials? She scrounged materials. So whatever she could find, she used. This is a child's drawing. The Germans renamed the children. They gave them these Czech names were germanified. When I looked at these drawings, I just want to quickly tell you that what happened was she worked with these children for two years. Her husband was going to be deported to Auschwitz. She heard about that. She, without with a sun glimmer of hope, decided to try to join him to go to. Both of them were killed in the gas chambers. But when she realized that she was leaving, she took the drawings of the children. We thought, originally, there were about 2,000 of them. It turns out that they were close to 4,000 of these drawings. She crammed the drawings into two suitcases and hid the suitcases of these drawings, hoping that they would be found. And then she went off to die in Auschwitz. After the war, the suitcases of the drawings were found. These drawings are now in the archive of the Jewish Museum in Prague. I spent time there on several occasions looking at the drawings, and they're amazing. And one thing that they tell you, which we didn't talk about today in the round table, we didn't mention is the element of wish. A dream Freud talks stunningly in the interpretation of dreams about how a dream is a wish, can be seen as a wish. And drawings can be wishes too. And when you look at these drawings by these children, you don't see atrocity. Almost none of the drawings show you the horrible things that were going on around them. What they show you is what the children missed, what the children longed for, what the children didn't have anymore, what they remembered. And sometimes you see what was going on. So here's a picture of the barracks at Terrazine by one of the children. This is a drawing by one of the artists in the camp, an adult artist in the camp. His name was Bedrick Fritta. And he did this drawing of one of the deportations. I'm not sure whether the people there are leaving or coming, but these drawings were done clandestinely, of course. This is a picture of one of the children. And here's another children's drawing. This is the doorway of Terrazine. When you go there today, if you visit the camp, you see the yellow painted plaster on the wooden door. This is another child's drawing. Now the children in Terrazine ranged from eight to about 16. No one was younger than eight. None of the children whose drawings we have were younger than eight. None of them was older than about 16. And when they're documented, when we have documentation, we have the birth of the child and the date of the deportation to Auschwitz, which is the date of the death, because no child would always die in the year of deportation. So you have those two days. And you can assume that the drawings were done within two years of the date of deportation. So this is what the inside look like from the child's point of view. This is another child's drawing. You have here the bunk beds. Everything was numbered, and you know the numbers were put on the arms, but everything was done according to the number. This house that Fiedel lived in was L104. The houses were also numbered. The Nazis were very good at dehumanizing people in every possible way, but giving somebody a number is a way of dehumanizing you. And we have no information, no information. So in my imagination, I see the matron on the right as Fiedel herself. She looked a little bit like that, but of course probably wasn't she. There is, you see the suitcases under the bed of the children who were in Tarazin. 15,000 children passed through this camp from 1942 to 1944 of the 15,000 children, Jewish children in that camp. One hundred children survived. All the rest died. So the drawings are, by most of these drawings, are by the children who died. Now this is Stitchery. The children, she's scrounged, which you can see this is a ledger, some page torn out of some ledger, and she got some wool and you see the child doing flowers, butterflies, all the things that the children wanted, the wishes, but they couldn't, didn't have. So this is the family gathered for the Pesach Seder, which of course the children no longer could experience, but they remembered. I love the bows on the hair, the big bows, and the hats. So carefully, lovingly done. And this is one of the most poignant ones, very famous, because of course the children had to leave their hats behind. Little Scotty Dog. The one survivor that I met, they were, the children's opera performed written by a composer who was in the camp called Burundi Bar. And I actually wrote about this and I actually met one of the survivors who sang the role of the cat. There was three animals in the opera, a dog of bird and a cat, and this, I'm Elle Beishberger who sang the role of the cat and the opera told me, I said, what did you miss most? And she said, I missed most, I wish, I could say it exactly the way she said, going between children in school, by which she meant being able to sit in school and learn with other children. So here you have the school and the little child in Terrazine is drawing the children coming out of school with their lunch boxes. I mean, it could be America today. It's so easy to go and look at these drawings and identify with this situation that occurred so long ago. Another drawing, you see a butterfly here, it's a watercolor, the child is struggling with the medium, watercolor is notoriously, some of you probably do watercolor is notoriously difficult medium, the child is working with it. And Field did all kinds of things, her teaching was amazing. A couple of survivors wrote about her teaching. I mean, she would sometimes hear, this is a terrifying image, it's one of the most terrifying images that have come out, you see the child is very frightened, the door is black, and the child is running away from something, it's hard to see what it is, the child is just very, there's just fear, it just seems to be in the image of fear. And then this notion of solidarity, holding hands with children, trying to make some kind of solidarity that could protect them. This is one of the few images we have, which shows a guard with a bully stick. And it's very interesting, I don't know if you can say I don't have my little pointer that I usually use when I'm teaching by a little laser pointer, but you see that the child graphically uses angular lines to do the frightening guy, but the sort of curving softer lines to show the other figure with a Jewish star. And the curving lines are the softer ones, the more vulnerable ones, and the angular ones are the lines of the ones who has the power and the danger, and you see the mug and debit, the stars of David there, that the children were of course forced to wear. And then this very, very sort of almost fairy tale like image where you have a princess, a dragon, what it looks like, and the upper left, can you see like an magician type of figure? And what I think about this is that sometimes Frito would read stories to the children, and the opposite way from what you did Nathan would read a story, and then the children would draw while she was reading. Sometimes she gave them still lifes, sometimes she showed them reproductions of famous artists. We have, we have, you can see the child trying to do something in imitation of, she did all kinds of things to try to stimulate them. And one of the things that was unique about her was that she was a no-nonsense apparently woman. She was a little young woman, she was not afraid of anything that came out of a child. Nothing could frighten her. She would let the child express anything. Ah, and this is a collage. We also work with collage. This means, this is an Alcapapot theater. The child is done, like a little, you know, punch and duty show type thing and this is a puppet theater but done with cut paper and a collage. This is a drawing by Otto Unger of the composer Hans Krascha, who did the music for Brindy Barne, and if I should go on and show a few more. So this, the Nazis made a film for the Red Cross to try to show the world because they were very worried that the world would find out what was going on. And they made a film called Difuele, shankd du yudin einestat. Some of you know, I see people nodding. The fur, Hitler, gives the Jews a city. And what they did was they took people out into the sun, they put rouge on their faces, they tried to make them look okay and photograph them. And then they had the children perform this opera Brindy Barne, which is a story of a, it's like a Hansel and Gretel story, two children, a little boy and a little girl, need to get milk for their sick mother. And they don't know what to do, they have no money. But they noticed that there's an organ grinder called Brindy Barne, who grinds his organ and makes music and people throw money into his hat and they think, ah, we will sing and people will give us money. But when they sing, their voices are too soft and nobody hears them. And then they go, the organ grinder chases them away and they go and they sleep. You know how Hansel and Gretel has that moment in the middle where the children fall asleep and the angels come and they had this very beautiful music at that point, the children fall asleep. And the little animals come out, the cat, the bird and the dog and they say to the children, if you all join together with all the children, your voice will be loud and people will give you the money for the milk for the mother. So that's what they do. And the children come out on stage and they sing together. The song that they sing is heartbreaking. It's a song that the words are, when my mother cradled me and the cradle, she never knew how I would grow up, what my life would be like when I would grow up, what I would be when I grew up. And of course it's heartbreaking because the children never grew up. And the people start to give money to them and the organ grinder steals the money and then the people chase the organ grinder and in the end the children prevail. This is the final scene of solidarity. You see the little sign, Skola school at the top and the children are singing together. And this finale of Brindy Bar was sung over and over again in the camp, adults sang it, children sang it. It was sort of a moment of, and here's the hand-lettered program for it showing that this is what they did. They did these little, and here you can see the set, that's Brindy Bar, the organ grinder. The set designer was called the Lanka, wonderful artist, and again the set. And then I just have this to show you that one of this artist, Frita, who did that transport picture had a three-year-old. He died of starvation in Auschwitz, but he made a picture book for his child. And it's exquisite, and it exists today. So you see Tommy with his little boy's name is turning three. He's looking out the window of Tarazin. And there he has his birthday cake. He's drawing, he's scribbling. And his father says, will you grow up to be a painter like me? He's praying. And then it says, this is the truth. Pravda, this is the truth. Our places like this, where the sun shines and there's, you can play in the meadow, run around naked and there'll be butterflies and birds. There's really a place like this outside this camp. And also this is also true that you can go buy food. And then this is the most heartbreaking thing for us as Americans to see. The last page of the book, I wish you for your birthday in 1944, food, peace, sunshine, and that you should come to the United States of America, signed what we would call daddy in check. Quite a difference in the discussions between, on the one hand, the creativity that the father shows, on the other hand, the tragedy that these children were murdered. And also discrepancy, as I think, I'm fortunate to be able to work with kids who aren't getting murdered and who are in fact in a new country and are given a very good life, compared to what they were facing and their parents were facing in Ethiopia. Real difference. This child lived, the father died, but the child actually did live. We have to be stopping shortly. For those who are interested, books are available. We'll sign them. Thank you for coming. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. I'm going to. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Yeah.