 And just kind of happens the same. I'm Ed Nurse-Ses in director of the center before we get going on today's program that was proposed by Beverly Zabriski and Harold Atman-Sparker. I'd like to tell you what we are planning for spring of next year. So far we have planned three round tables. One will be on data versus this course, humanity is in the age of big data. The other would be on the ethics of AI, machine learning, and the last one would be on the general subject of memory looked at from various perspectives. Beverly will take over from this point and introduce the speakers. Thank you. Let's see. Let me do this way. Welcome, welcome. The persons in this room are one of the three audiences for this program. There is also a live stream audience and there will also be a YouTube audience going through the years. So remember that if you get up and ask a question or make a remark, you will be recorded out at infinitum and that's taken as a release that we are allowed to use your question in your presence in the YouTube video. So welcome to all three audiences to this day. I'm a Jungian analyst at gave me permission to say that in this hallowed building and tells you what an ecumenical mind he has. And Jung said that if he ever came back to another life, he would study prime numbers. That's how he would spend his time. And he urged all of his followers to do so. I have not done so. So the closest I get to understanding mathematics is by being around minds like in this circle. And so I think that's a pleasure we'll all have today. So thank you all for agreeing to come and to be with us and Alma, especially to you. You stepped in the last minute because Stephanie was ill. So thank you. Alma did not intend to be here this morning and here she is. And she is a very passionate person. So Harold and I were talking about this as a possibility and he suggested the title Mathematics and Other Reality. So that's what we'll be speaking about today. And it's a spontaneous conversation. There's been no preparation. And it's meant to be scholars and intellectuals who hear each other and then get into an exchange. Harold is a senior scientist at the Collegium Helvetium at the University of Zurich and the Polytechnic in Zurich. After a PhD in physics at Munich, he worked as a research scientist at the Max Planck Institute for extraterrestrial physics. Then he served as head of the theory group at the Institute for Frontier Areas of Psychology at Freiburg. This fields of research are the theory of complex systems, conceptual and theoretical aspects of quantum theory and mind matter relations. He's the president of the Society for Mind and Matter Research and editor in chief of the interdisciplinary journal Mind and Matter. Last summer I went to Harold's conference on the Science of Consciousness in Interlochen. He said it was one of their smallest conferences, it was 620 scientists from around the world discussing the matter of consciousness and where it emerges from and scientific perspectives on that. And Switzerland, we like to keep everything small. We're a small country, after all. And then Amma Steingaard. Herages the interplay between politics and mathematical rationality. Her second book, Accountable Democracy, Mathematical Reasoning and Representative Democracy in America, 1920 to Now, examines how mathematical thought and computing technologies have impacted electoral politics in the U.S. in the 20th century. She investigates how changing computational practices from statistical modeling to geometrical analysis insinuated themselves into the most basic definitions of fair representation of the American electorate. Nothing could be more timely than what you're working on. In pure abstraction, mathematical thought and high modernism forthcoming. She investigates the influence of axiomatic reasoning on mid-century American intellectual thought. She's a junior fellow of the Harvard Society of Fellows and a pre-doctoral research fellow with the Max Planck Institute in Berlin. Pardon me? I was a junior fellow. I'm now in Colombia. All right. Oh, yes. That's true. You are now a professor at Colombia that was not added to this. Thank you. Michael Harris has become a mainstay intellect of the Helix group here. He's a professor of mathematics at Colombia and is on extended leave from the University Perry D. Duro where he taught for 20 years. He was professor at Brandeis, got his PhD from Harvard. He's organized and co-organized more than 20 conferences and workshops. In his field of number theory and until 2018 directed the European Research Council Project, arithmetic of automorphic motives. Fantastic. I have to find out what it means, but I know it's fantastic. He's been a visiting professor at Bethlehem University in Palestine. He's been an exchange scholar at the Stecholov Institute in Moscow. He's initiated the project of science for people in Nicaragua and London Paris number theory seminar. His book, Mathematics Without Apologies won the Prose Award in Mathematics. He is a contributions to the Langlands program. Maybe you'll tell us what that is. He won the Grand Prix, Sophie's, your men's block out of me in sciences in 2006. That he asked me to condense his introduction because it was not too long, so many accomplishments. Harry Field is a silver professor and university professor at NYU. Before that he taught at Princeton, USC and CUNY Graduate Center. He's the author of Science Without Numbers, Expanded Edition, and Saving Truth from Paradox. As well as numerous articles in the philosophy of mathematics and logic. His Science Without Numbers defends the view that one can develop physics without assuming the existence of mathematical entities. He's been working in the philosophy of mathematics, less on the existence of mathematical entities, and more on the objectivity of mathematics, which you're going to prove today. Chris McDonald. McDaniel has a BA in philosophy from Western Washington University. His PhD in philosophy is from University of Massachusetts Amherst. He's been teaching at Syracuse University until 2019 and is now professor of philosophy at Notre Dame. His publications include the books The Fragmentation of Being and this is metaphysics, which is forthcoming. Topics in metaphysics, ethics, and the history of philosophy. Welcome, Chris. Marcus. He's one of the founders of New Realism. He studied in Heidelberg, Lisbon, New York. He has held the chair since 2009 for epistemology, modern and contemporary philosophy at the University of Bonn. And at his appointment, he became Germany's youngest philosophy professor. Now I just heard you upstairs tell the others that now there's a younger one. The mathematics, he also won a fields medalist at my university, was high at one month after me, so I was the youngest full professor at my university for one month. And that paid a plus for five at the age of 21 and just won the fields medal last year, so apparently you go tired. Yeah, so that's the reality of mathematics. Someone comes along younger, right? He's also the director of the International Center for Philosophy in Bonn, as well as the Multidisciplinary Center for Science and Thought. He's held faculty in visiting positions at many different universities, including NYU, and he's written popular books about philosophical issues. His book Why the World Does Not Exist has been translated into 14 languages. Sometimes we wish that was right, right? So I would now, after this long pause, ask Harold to open up the discussion and thank you for your patience. On this round table, you will hear a lot about the term ontology and ontology as opposed to epistemology. So I thought it might be a good idea to start with a very brief, maybe anecdotal piece, which illustrates to everybody what ontology is all about, what epistemology is all about, and then we might go from there. In my example, my anecdote of course comes from the history of my own fields from physics. It goes back to the early 1930s, it goes to Ireland, to Dublin, because at that time I am intruding, I was working at Dublin and he was often visited by his physicist colleagues, like in this case, Erwin Wehrner Heisenberg and Paul Dirac. So Heisenberg and Dirac just took a little walk after the lunch out of Dublin in the hills, I hope, and then they come over such a hill and in the valley they see a huge herd of sheep. And Heisenberg says, look Dirac, these sheep are all shorn and Dirac, he was known as a very meticulous thinker, so he had to analyze the statement before he could answer. And then he said, well Heisenberg, at least on this side. So you see, this is about being and knowing, right? So I don't think I have to explain that, but being, this is the notion of philosophy which ontology deals with. So ontology is about existence, whenever you make an existence statement and philosophy this is about ontology. Whenever you make a knowledge statement it's about epistemology. And I think many sciences in the 20th century have seen a tendency to build up an ontology which many of them call a fundamental ontology, which in physics would be about the existence of particles as kind of building blocks for the universe and everything else. Like for instance, biology, genes or even up to neuroscience is actually in some way, in one way or another reducible to these particles. Even though this program is of course not completed, but the assumption is in principle this is the way to go. And you know, when I still was a student I had a PhD advisor who could still tell me that chemistry is not yet understood physics. So the hope was really to take all of chemistry back into physics. And the research program for instance of microbiology or molecular biology is set up in the same spirit, just produced in the smaller parts. In the neuroscience there is the neuron doctrine where people think that you can understand everything in the brain once you understand how the neurons operate and cooperate. So this research program is the program in all these fields to build up the kind of fundamental ontology, we have the notion of ontology. So there's only one fundamental sort of beings and everything can be reduced to that. Now interestingly the second half of the 20th century voices here and there came up and these voices became one more who sort of doubted that this is really working. So we see today a kind of development in which people at least in the natural sciences, that's what I can talk about really started out this notion of fundamental ontology. And talking about fundamental of course raises immediately a resonance with fundamentalism in much broader sense. So this round table is also at least to some extent a round table that could be, I don't know how it works, how it will develop, it could be a kind of critique or traces of a critique of fundamentalism generally. I mean in physics and in the sciences we see that anyway. And I'm really curious to hear from all of you how you think about that. You want to do a round? Sure. Yeah. Yeah. Well yeah I can say a few words about the meaning of those terms, how I understand them and then how this relates to this claim that you flack that the world does not exist which is short hand or like a slogan for saying that we shouldn't even be foundationalists in ontology itself which I think is not identical to physics. But just a few words about that how at least I understand those terms. Well I think ontology is the systematic investigation into the meaning of existence or depending on your methodology just into existence right. So it might be a good idea to think about the meaning of existence, statements to approach existence so that could be that good methodology that's why I'm saying it or just into existence. And epistemology is the discipline which deals with the nature and scope of what we can know about what there is. However I think that of course the two cannot be thoroughly separated because trivially knowledge exists right. And what we've learned from just the development of modern natural science is precisely that there's a sense in which the universe insuffides the observable universe is somehow intimately tied to its nobility by creatures such as us for the trivial reason that our best and maybe only way but you will tell me about that to know anything about the observable universe is by way of interfering with it right by intervening. That's you know you don't know the universe a priori maybe there's something that you know about the universe without experiments such as that the universe is the universe or maybe some more demanding things but anyhow so you know I think that one of the things that we actually learn from the development of modern science is that we need to take into account that no one exists within the universe. So this is something that I would also like to discuss with some people here right. There seem to be paradigm cases of very demanding knowledge claims where we precisely cannot just distinguish between epistemology and ontology in that neat way. Oh well I have opinions about the universe but none of them is legitimated by my professional expertise I'm going to keep them to myself. Instead I'm going to talk about what existence might mean to a mathematician because it's a word that is used systematically and yet as I've thought about this for some time I in its use the use entails no metaphysical commitment whatsoever. This is certainly how I understand it now there are versions or interpretations of the foundations of mathematics say a hundred years ago people might have thought differently that it is a need to found mathematics on something that's metaphysically transparent but not so many people think that way anymore and when the word existence is so that a typical mathematical statement begins the theorem there exists such and such. Another typical opening for mathematical statement is let X be something. When you analyze that of course this is just really a performative gesture that is saying this is how one opens the discussion if you analyze that's an imperative. Now who is to whom is that imperative addressed? Nobody who is reading it is going to object or is going to prevent this X from existing. So this is just a way of talking and you might say that mathematicians have managed to develop a coherent system of communication in the absence in spite of the disadvantages of natural language the fact that. So that's a first approach and the other thing I would say is that at least over the past well maybe 50, 70 years mathematics has been increasingly the practice of mathematics has been increasingly dominated especially in my field of number theory by the fact that our imaginations are expectations have outrun our ability to verify them. So there are large programs in which people are working. The aim of which is to construct objects whose existence in whatever sense one wants to mean that and again I don't think it's metaphysically very significant but the existence has been anticipated. So there's a that's to say there are series of conjectures that such and such a structure should be invoked to explain the what has already been studied in terms of something more. So this is a different this part of the discussion I don't want to get into it but something that one might call more fundamental although in a sense it's the opposite of more fundamental as that would be used by the physicists. So for example Peter Scholzmann was given this position became the youngest professor in Germany on the basis of his contributions to constructing a theory a kind of theory that had been anticipated that explained many of the phenomena that had been or the mathematical theory that had been developed. So I think I should stop here. Sure, I'm happy to say. I guess the two things that I want to say isn't I come to it I'm a historian so I come to this question for a little bit from a different perspective. What I'm interested in is the question how question of existence ideas about ontology specifically in mathematics have changed over time right. So when Michael was just talking about the question about foundation right we know that interest in the foundation of mathematics really at the end of the 19th century and the 10th or 20th century really started because of the discovery of non-Eclidean geometry right. So part of what interests me is how new mathematical developments new idea new research project call into question what are already kind of existing assumptions that people and mostly are both philosophers but they're also thinking about mathematicians themselves are thinking. So this is kind of the question that interests me is how these ideas about ontology and postemology change over time in relation to research itself. And then to get to this question that you were saying about ontology and epistemology it's I was very interesting because one of the things that I've been thinking about for a long time is that in a way in mathematics there is no distinction between ontology and epistemology. I know it's a big claim and I'm throwing it on purpose out there. But if you take something let's take something like that notion that there exists a four-dimensional object right. For years for centuries mathematicians did not acknowledge that this is something that's even possibility. It's only in the 19th century that this idea that the four-dimensional space right exists comes along. And then first how mathematicians learn to think about the four-dimensional also then shapes what is the existence of a four-dimensional is. There's a way in which the way people think about ontology and the way of thinking about ontology are so linked in mathematics. And I'm surrounded by philosophers so I kind of want to throw that back at you. How do we make that distinction historically and even right now? So I don't do philosophy in mathematics but I am interested in existence so I assume that's why I was invited here. So I think that's maybe one thing. It's a couple of questions just as a person coming the outside of this then maybe I'll just enter into the discussion or downstream people to consider. How do we tell when we are using a notion of existence that is metaphysically committal or not? You might think when you're doing mathematics you don't care whether or not it is the day the numbers that you're talking about or the functions or what not really exist. That might be something that's not relevant to your concerns as a practicing mathematician but you might still wonder does the fact that I don't care mean that I'm not using a notion of existence as committal or is it that I just don't care whether I am using a committal notion? I hope he says. May I interject because I have a, it's not a joke, it's a true story. I was, one of the reasons I'm here is the first things that happened. My career as a mathematician who was invited to talk about things other than mathematics I was invited to review a book for the notices of the American Mathematical Society. And the book, I made me, I had to read a fair amount of philosophy including Heidegger at the time which, Did you say Heidegger? Heidegger, yes. Heidegger. It was written by a mathematician but he did well, well, well. Heidegger studied mathematics people who forget that. He looked up the degree in mathematics and theology which kind of explains what's going on. So while I was thinking about this I was at a conference in minster and I was sitting at a table, drinking beer with some of my colleagues and they were discussing the reality of the continuum. There was a German and American and a French. This is a true story. This is one of these things that you can't make up. So the Frenchmen said, didn't believe the real numbers existed. These were all very successful mathematicians by the way. And they all work in numbers theory. The Frenchmen said, no, he just doesn't believe it. It doesn't stop them from working with them. The Germans said, well, he doesn't believe that they exist individually but as a collective. They had some sort of collective existence. And the Americans said, not only do they exist but he can show you one anytime you come to his computer screen. He can just make them exist. So all of them are doing mathematics, the same kind of mathematics, reading each other's papers. In that sense I would say if there's a metaphysical commitment it's something that escapes any of the people who would supposedly be committed. And so I would say that if a commitment is not conscious it doesn't count. One of the things the last three or so comments bring out is this idea you started in like by mentioning that some objects are posited. Some seem to be discovered based on mathematical research. Others one starts by positing. So even the idea as you say I'm a four dimensional space was originally sort of put out there as almost like a prescriptive. And then later it seems to be an existence. Maybe that's a little bit about what you were talking about at the beginning. There's this edge between the being of it, the positing of it and then the discovery of it which is more of a epistemological issue I suppose. So Chris look what you provoked. Do you want to carry on? Maybe in part you could change. So I liked the idea of physics as fundamental that Harold started with. In particular the idea that particles in fields are fundamental which seems to have gone out in recent versions of recent news about quantum mechanics. I also liked Michael's idea that in mathematics, mathematical entities don't exist in the same way that physical entity does do. The existence in mathematics is special. My early work was trying to put these together. So there's no problem when you just consider pure mathematics of just saying well basically any consistent theory is fine. There is an issue though about the applications of mathematics. So in particular people there was a time at least when people argued that the same reasons for believing in particles and fields also were reasons for believing in the existence of mathematical entities because the idea was that the reason for believing in mathematical entities is that all our theories postulate them. That all our best theories are foreign related to the heavy mathematical language so they also postulate mathematical entities. And so the same argument that applied to particles in fields all applied to mathematical entities. So I didn't like Chris conclusion. I wanted Michael for you that basically in whatever sense mathematical entities exist is just because there's a consistent theory in solving them. So a bunch of my work has been trying to reconcile these two things. And in the initial stage it was trying to show that you can actually formulate the physical theories without postulate mathematical entities. And in more recent years it's kind of taken a different turn but reconcile the views that the two of you mentioned has been sort of a major project of my work in philosophy of mathematics. Let me just relate to what the mathematicians sort of speak. But the idea of non-committal or something. When you talk to, you mentioned that conference in Talaqah last year. One of the keynote speakers there was Gess who Roger Panros. Roger Panros is actually both, he is an accomplished mathematician and an accomplished physicist. And Roger Panros, I mean he's completely clear about his belief that mathematical objects exist. And not only in the sense of let X be or something like that. Ten years earlier we had a conference with Alahqot. Alahqot is totally serious about mathematical objects exist out there. And this is interesting also with respect to another debate, the debate between the question is mathematics discovered or is it invented? And of course all these people have written a lot about this. And I only want to say that it seems to me simply due to the existence of these people that somehow the question is still unresolved. And I mean as you know they are physicists like whatever you know David Doyle's George Ellis who now say mathematical objects are the prime cause of force for the universe. I mean George things causation is primarily from mathematical objects to the material energetic system of the universe. And it's not that he's either an incompetent mathematician or an incompetent physicist because he wrote the standard book about space time with Dean Hawking in 1973. So I think he knows what he's doing in the technical field. But he believes that right. And David Dorgis also not like a zero figure in quantum computing. And he also argues that he thinks the major mistake that the philosophers that he surrounded with that Oxford is that they do not get this. So I think there's an interesting sociological piece of evidence. So there are those and there are those mathematicians and physicists. So that apparently it's not sufficient to be either a good mathematician or physicist to. Just to finish what I wanted to say originally the idea was actually also to have Max Tegmark here. Max Tegmark has written this book you all know it in which he claims mathematics is not only existing in the sense that it is a basis for physics but it also exists per se. I mean the book's title is The Mathematical Universe. It exists per se. And every, you know, if you would put kind of evolution of existence then mathematics would be the first thing that exists in his belief. I mean I'm only, I'm only throwing this around. It's a little bit hard to buy. I mean Max Tegmark is an extremist in this case but I don't know. Invention or discovery? Can I bring it back to history just because I always find it useful. So I think that a lot of this conversation about the issue at stake about discovery and not to say the discovery and the relation between physics and mathematics in terms of existence. It's again something that becomes a real problem only in the turn of the 19th century and the early 20th century. It was even, even till then people believed that mathematics arise out of them anyway, arise out of the world. If a mathematical concept understood is an abstraction, right? The notion of a fundamental triangle was an abstraction from, you know, all the individual triangles that one have seen, right? That's the basic idea. So if you think about mathematics this way, as mathematics existing abstracted as something that comes from the world, then the notion that mathematics then applies to physics and that you need physics, you need mathematics in physics is not as problematic, right? It's only once at the turn of the 20th century once you, mathematicians and philosophers believe that mathematics is no longer bound by the world. If mathematical ideas are not just descriptive of what's out there, then the philosophical question about what's the relation to the physical mathematics become as troubling as it is for us today, right? So it's not to say there's an answer, just to say that that itself has history, that itself has kind of a history that I think it probably could be. And I mean, again, I don't have the answer to that, but I think that looking at what was the question of the turn of the century helps us kind of think through a little bit about how we think about this question about existence and the role of mathematics. And I'll just say one more word about it, at the turn of the century, mathematicians really, I mean, there are a lot of mathematicians that really cared about it and the idea was so people like George Beacock, for example, or Vaitland as well, they were thinking about what is it now to say that mathematics applies to physics, right? What does it say now to mathematics, if mathematics doesn't come out of the world, it's not an abstraction for the world, how can we think about it? And the argument at the end of making is that, I should say, building on kind of a Hilbert idea of mathematics mostly, but the argument that they end up making is that the difference between the number and the electron is not one of kind but of degree, that it's all abstractions all the way out. And right, I mean, it's not that the numbers are in the terms of two different kinds. So again, this is all things that have been contested as given at moment for particular reasons. Right. So even in the case of, say, the 19th century map, like Reimann, differentiable manifolds, so there's, I mean, if you really think that all that exists is physical space and it's contents, there's, so the way you standardly explain differentiable manifolds introduces things that are not in the physical space because it introduces the tangent spaces. And so if you really think that all there is is physics, then you might think that, well, you really need to be able to re-describe the mathematics of differential geometry without going into the tangent space but just using the curves in the space itself. And probably that can be done, but there is at least a technical challenge. And so maybe, you think this challenge isn't really worth doing because the tangent space is a fairly simple idealization, but it just depends really on your attitude to how much I do-ization you are prepared to think is okay. I'm wondering how often some of these formulas are used as analogies. And if that's relevant to what you were starting to say, Chris, in terms of the other realities that are somehow related to all of these ideas and elements. Can you say a bit more about what you mean by analogy? Well, I'm just- I mean coming- I know that there's all sorts of analogies that are drawn from physics and drawn from mathematics by people like me who don't really know what I'm talking about. And yet I'm talking about something that has to do with existence and experience. And I thought you were sort of approaching that realm in what you were saying earlier. So the question I was- at least trying to raise was a question about how we can tell whether a theory is committed to some genuine entities or not. And I was suggesting that it's not sufficient to simply look at some practitioners who are disavowing commitment to say that the theory isn't committed. And maybe the kind of antidote that you were alluding to do with people that you both mentioned further illustrate that point because you can have successful theoreticians who disagree on whether or not the theory is committed to the entities in question. And so I think it takes a bit of work to figure out what actually are the metaphysical consequences of a given theory, whether it's in mathematics or physics or whatnot. It could be that there are some people that don't care about that and so it's irrelevant to the primary things that they're working on. And let me add that you need a lot of philosophical theorizing to state exactly what is at stake when you ask for instance the discovery versus invention of the section. So there's a very broad tendency and I think this is a mistake in ontology. So as we're not the option to say real mistake but it's a mistake that many people make. I call this an eve ontological realism. So according to an eve ontological realism you think that you're really committed to something that it really exists if it's mind independent. So you think of it in terms of how things were before they were minds or how things are if you abstract away from the fact that they're minds. So remarkably you think that the hallmark of existence is what I call the world without spectators. Take the spectators out and what's left that exists. That is problematic as a criterion for existence trivially because minds exist. So if your views, they are minds, they should matter and then there's matter and that this shouldn't be mental and whatever is on this side is the existence stuff and the other thing is kind of either non-existent or has to emerge super-vene or do things that are not fully existing. I think then you already got into philosophical trouble and some ways of formulating, some versions of formulating the discovery versus invention, distinction from mathematical objects or in other fields, fictional objects have similar, similar problems, dream objects, dream of a certain unicorn, then did you discover the unicorn or did you invent it? There are similar problems there and I think that quite often if we don't settle these purely philosophical issues beforehand then we get easily confused. I think that's really a contribution that philosophy will make there and you need not be, you know why, you need not be like a trained ontologist to be like a really good mathematician or physicist. These are orthogonal capacities I think. In physics usually the practice in physics is not concerned with these questions at all in most cases. I mean in philosophy of physics we have exceptions of course but the practice in physicists if you ask him a ontology he will just, he will either not understand you or he will close the door and keep you outside because he is just, he goes into his lab in the morning switches on the pumps and makes his spectra and then he analyzes them and that's the work of 99.9% of people working in physics. Then there is this remaining 0.1% who are actually interested in these philosophical questions and then you know the advent of quantum mechanics actually erased the attention of this 0.1% because in quantum mechanics the first time in the history of physics the measurement itself becomes a problem. It didn't happen before and why is this so? It is so because I don't know, I don't go into all these formal details but conceptually speaking it is so that the state of a system that you measure has to be understood differently from the state of the system as it exists ontically before you measure it and that the additional complication is once you measure the system you extract information so this is an epistemic process but at the same point you act back on the system so that it becomes, so that it moves into a state of being the ontic state in which it was not before. So the information that you extract is actually already outdated when you read it out somehow and that's a complication that you never had before and that drove people crazy in physics in the early days of quantum mechanics until in the 1970s some philosophers of physics Ehrhard Schuyber and others came up and really saw how they can conceptually solve this riddle with the introduction of ontic and epistemic states which is now when you go to Perimidor Institute or other institutions everybody talks about Scientology and Siai epistemology this has become a standard notion in the interpretation of quantum mechanics. And interesting case actually because it becomes important otherwise you confuse everything all the time if you don't make that distinction. I don't know whether this is now really a philosophy whether this is a distinction that philosophers might understand as something that has really to do with ontology and epistemology or whether this is again only another kind of practical use of the notions. You see what I mean? So I don't thought the issue about measurement was different. I mean even pre-quantum I mean measurements do always disturb the system. I mean and you can say okay well you can reduce the disturbance to a small amount more than you can in quantum mechanics. I agree completely. I think disturbance by measurement is certainly not itself novel. But I would have thought of this is the real problem about measurement in quantum mechanics is that the early formulations of the theory took it as this special process that wasn't quantum mechanically explained. So there was supposed to be this more or less general law of quantum evolution but then it was supposed to be broken by measurement even though measurement presumably is a physical process so how could measurement break the general laws. I think around the same I do think that in recent years there have become attempts to resolve this problem. I think I would have cited John Dell as the physicist at the Great Lakes. We are talking about measurements now where we can reduce the interaction to an extent that almost becomes invisible anymore but I agree with you completely measurement is always an interaction. That's right. But in quantum mechanics it turned out as a problem and of course you are right that measurement does not follow the laws of unitary evolution that's what you are mentioning. You need a different law or at least in the early theories they both said that law didn't hold but also didn't offer a serious alternative law that did hold. I don't want to emphasize this too much but let me just mention why I still think that it is an important conceptual difference because what you come up with in quantum mechanics is the important insight that sequence of measurements makes a difference. We call it non-commutativity of observations and so on. That can be easily understood actually by the fact that when you make a measurement and you change the state then you make the second measurement of another observable then you make that measurement already on another state which means that when you revert the sequence of measurements to a different result. In that sense it becomes important at the basis even at the mathematical basis of the theory. Let me get back to mathematics that say even starting when you talk about measurement then pretty much all the time you are talking about a measurement with respect to a theory which is based upon properties or presumed properties of the real numbers. The real reality nothing is more real nor less real than the real numbers. The real was introduced to draw distinction with the imaginary numbers which were very problematic and even I didn't even realize this until yesterday that even Cauchy invented a theory of complex analysis of wrote somewhere that he would have preferred not to be imaginary. And what were they or not but they come up in the processing equation. Why are the real numbers or invented? I guess maybe I gave that away. But what Cauchy discovered is that people use these things indiscriminately for the purposes of physics and to allow and to make it possible to get past the pre-secratic paradoxes of continuity. And so things were fine. Things were fine. There were people working with real numbers except that there was no axiomatic, complete axiomatic theory until the middle of the 19th century. And then it turned out that the axiomatic theory was settled but then these real numbers have properties that people couldn't understand. The point, the crucial point was the discovery that the continuum hypothesis was undecidable. You don't know how many real numbers there are. In fact, it's up to the theoretician to decide how many real numbers there are. So maybe right now I should have wanted to make an apology to the set theorists because I've written an article in Quanta in which I suggested that the set theorists were concerned about the kind of foundations for set theory that were used by number theorists in proving, for example, from our last theorem. There was some controversy around that. And I actually learned by interacting with set theorists that this is not at all their concern. They were not trying to establish roles for a wave to the, any of the set theorists are watching. They were not, they're not always interested in establishing roles. Some people not set theorists were concerned and I'm not sure where this controversy came to. Anyway, the upshot is that as to maybe to move to the 21st century, that's now, yes, well, we're not going to project. The same questions remain unsettled in a sense. That is to say what kind of foundations for set theory do you want? And it so happens that the kinds of mathematics that are being developed, not in fact in part in order to provide mathematical, coherent explanations of some physical theories, some things that are being developed in string theory in particular, involve going beyond the axioms, the zermelofranco axioms of set theory. So inaccessible cardinals, for example. And so the question is who decides, who decides what is, what the foundations might be? What are the foundations of mathematics, well it's becoming more and more popular to develop series, to use theories that are based on the presumption of existence of existence, in the sense that one works with some of inaccessible cardinals. But that means there's big, big sets that are much, much bigger than anything one can produce by the intellect. One has to, there's whether it's called inaccessible because there's no reason, cannot establish their existence on the basis of the axioms, even including the existence of infinite set theory. Much, much more infinite. In fact there are something called the hierarchy of different kinds of infinities. Which, where do we want to stop within that hierarchy? Well the only historically reasonable answer to that question is that mathematicians are going to use whichever kinds of foundations what for set theory that provide the answers to the questions that we consider to be reasonable and important. I was just going to say that, I mean it seems to me that one of the things that came out in a few of the comments is this distinction between the philosopher and the mathematician and what sort of, what do you think, maybe the mathematician itself don't have certain kind of commitment but a typical commitment that's where this comes. But I'm going to try and push on that just because I'm here and why not. And just ask, can you even go, like I mean what does it mean to go beyond the mathematicians themselves? I mean the example that Michael just gave is why in which the mathematicians are the one that getting to a point that they redefine with the foundation or the question of deciding infinities to the correct, you need to re question again what the foundation which the theory builds on. So the kind of questions about the existence always come from the practicing mathematicians or I mean the innocent question or physicists you can think about as well. So what is even the separation between the philosophy and the mathematicians? Well mathematics is a discipline with its own rule book including a sociology, what counts as evidence, like a whole discipline that you can characterize in manifold ways and so on philosophy. And they sometimes intersect in the history, sometimes big time, Plato or Aristotle, sometimes like super big time, Kantor, Seth theory, then a little less right now. So you can describe those curves and philosophy is just one of those disciplines. And then philosophy to something else, so it would be of course an interesting question right I mean contemporary ontology is like a very well developed field right there's a lot happening in ontology and meta ontology and metaphysics and meta metaphysics and how they relate right so that's its own development and these fields like intersect in very interesting ways and that always remains to be explored right with what's going on in contemporary mathematics. And my experience talking to my mathematics friends and colleagues is that indeed there's a very widespread pragmatism when you talk to very high level mathematicians they would say there's a sense in which right now we care less right so and then there might be an interesting question about why this is solved right so why in the field is this the case right but I think that what we need to bear in mind when we ask these questions about philosophy and other disciplines this is often goes unnoticed in particular in the Anglophone world because there's a different very different way of thinking about the philosophy is you know position in the academic division of labor but in my neck of the woods you know we think of philosophy as just another discipline just one of the sciences. So I want to make sure that you give me the sense that I'm very lovely. I think this is a you know so that's why if you ask me I think you know if you do philosophy off and then that's another discipline say mathematics or history. Of course I'm in history of mathematics so I understand what you're saying I'm not trying to say that philosophy has no place there was not really the really question was try to say how do you explain the relation when you think about those specific questions right about ontology of when we're talking here about ontology mathematics now then how do you understand the relation between the philosophy and the mathematics historically right how do you understand the way in which the ideas that arise from mathematics then influence the kind of philosophical debates or the other way right I do think that there is obviously there's two ways. Yes it goes two ways yeah like but how do we that's the question was related to say how do you understand that relation. Yeah I would ask Michael for instance you know the way in which Michael developed his relationship you know towards set theory you know I would want to know whether you would you know so there's a view let's just call it you know mathematical pluralism and you know I'm heavily simplifying but you know like roughly it would go something like that look they're very different you know it depends on the foundations that you choose right so there's a really there's a sense in which you can just choose your axiom system this is something we learned from mathematics of the second half of the 20th century right and then there's this mathematics and this other mathematics and the choice between the axioms can be you know in terms of like elegance they can be all sorts of mathematical internal criteria for why I am a mathematician would say I go for this rather than that right and then this kind of pluralism would just mean that there's no you know then this would raise for instance for me a philosophical question you know is there even a universe of mathematical entities you know if we interpret the contemporary mathematics realistically right so so even if we think that they're comitable you know given mathematical pluralism is that like a universe of mathematical objects given what mathematicians know right now that's something that would come to my mind but this would also depend you know like we have a leading philosophy of mathematician here so I don't know how Hartree looks at this how you would describe this discourse right so just I I I view myself as a pluralist here and and so just sharpening the issue of the slightly in the in terms of the example that Michael raised about so Michael said that the continuum hypothesis is under side of all I mean in in some sense is radically under state things in that you can give almost in the answer you want to do what it sizes and it will be consistent with the rest of the axioms of said it's a little bit theory yeah but so so a version of the pluralist view that that that I kind of like is that there really is no serious question what is the real size of the content you are there are basically any any consistent answer is perfectly okay and the idea of of asking which is the right one is just a wrong headed way to think about it and that this marks a serious difference between mathematics and physics where where basically there is a right answer even if we don't know it aren't you considering that there might be at a later time a reason to choose there are the set there is yeah I want to find right maybe add an axi because the set of right seems was just established to make set theory workable and use useful and if they had right but more right right right but but but what they do is they offer aesthetic criteria for for saying well you know it's it's a prettier theory if you make the size of the content you want the smallest possible or the second smallest or or whatever and and different people offer different aesthetic criteria that you mentioned it's a poor one or geometry before we have it could be described perhaps this way and then using the dimensions and how does that decision get made and is that the aesthetic one or other consideration well so I'm not sure I understand the question I mean one thing which I think may be your question but but probably isn't but but so so theories of of differentiable manifolds are developed using the theory of the real numbers and the the different answers to the size of the continuum give you different pictures of what the real numbers are like so but so there's a separate question as to how much objectivity there is about say lines in physical space but even if you thought it was completely objective what the size of infinity of the of the lines in in physical space was that doesn't really settle the size of the continuum as mathematicians tend to view it because because mathematicians tend to think well mathematical reality is one thing physical reality is something else of course we we we got to our conception of the mathematical real numbers by thinking about physical space but still there are different things it could turn out empirically the physical lines aren't anything like the real numbers I mean maybe there's just like the rational numbers but but the mathematical realist things well that doesn't tell you anything about the real numbers it just shows that the physical lines need to correspond to the real numbers so so even if there's a question as an objective of question as to the size of an infinity of physical lines I think the the typical mathematical non pluralist is going to say well there's no obvious reason why the answer to the question of the size of the genuine real numbers has to be the same as that I'm sorry yes I just want to do that to the other realities yes exactly that was by the time to yeah I think that has a lot to do with the notion that that popped up in some of the commentary in the last maybe ten minutes the notion of pluralism you know in the in the sciences when you look at the development of the sciences I mean physics is the paradigm example but the others too talking about ontology always had I think historically speaking the the or or brought the implicit request not only to talk about something that exists but actually to talk about one thing that exists not many levels not pluralistic one fundamental ontology and of course this has good reasons I mean for physics one of the interesting reasons behind that was actually that physicists try to formalize mathematically and in the mathematics you can very powerfully do that with symmetry principles and and this is the symmetry increasing the symmetry always has the kind of taste of the unification picture unification picture leads to one fundamental ontology now this fundamental way to look at things also created the idea that in physics this is actually a byproduct it's secondary but it's created by the fundamentalism let me speak let me say that everything can be reduced to this fundamental level for all other descriptions like thermodynamics hydrodynamics physical chemistry can somehow be reduced and of course then we have to explain in detail what we mean by that to a kind of elementary fundamental ontology and I think this program has I mean it from the very beginning it was of course not realized to its full extent but people were thinking in principle this is doable and now in certain areas we know for sure that it's that it's not working that way we know now when this is still not covered in the textbooks but we know that thermodynamics cannot be reduced to statistical mechanics I mean what I'm saying is the knowledge that we have at statistical mechanics is not enough to create thermodynamics and the fact that Lord Kelvin and others Boltzmann they had this heuristic guess of this of the relation between the kinetic energy of the molecules and the temperature was completely heuristic we only understand that really fully since the 1970s through quantum through quantum field theory and developments by Rudolf Harg and others this is algebraic quantum field theory only at that late time hundred years after the heuristic guess it became possible to build the bridge really in a pro mathematically profound way and then it turns out that you in order to make the bridge it's not enough that you know that you know the lower level the mechanical level you have to you have to select a context at the higher level and implement that at the lower level and then you can make the bridge formally in a formerly sound manner so this this is in a way in an example for a kind of pluralism because if it is if this is so then you have to assume that the temperature of a container of gas is also a property that exists in the ontological sense in physics it cannot be fully reduced to the to the can to mechanical properties I can't I have to explain that more fully I I don't I don't know if it may be just my a I don't know if I do wanted to say that's stronger than I know to say but but I I would like to be it convinced a more detail this because yeah I'm pretty sure but we can maybe you can do it over dinner or something I'm ready to do that actually but I'm only giving you this picture because everybody knows what temperature is and everybody knows what the motion of molecules somehow is and it's it's actually a simple example which I wanted to use to really talk about now to get the discussion into the pluralism thing and and I think for us in physics we in some way we have to to give up this kind of deep seeded conviction that everything goes back to the particles. Let me ask a question about other reality maybe you don't want to answer this because much more radical than than the emergence of temperature as a separate property is the notion that you can actually quantify over all possible anthologies and then there are I don't know how seriously physicists take the notion of multiverse but is that what is that but I but people certainly do talk about it quite a lot. I know. I see. So and this is a this is a different idea of pluralism because if you if you go that way then you have you have all these levels of description that I want to have as pluralistic you have you you double the pluralism in each universe you have them again and in the next universe you have all of that again and this is I mean I know this is an interpretation of quantum mechanics which some people appreciate I don't. I want to switch the register a bit to get more to the other realities because from the outside mathematics and number carry the notion of real truth the reality is carried by by the numbers whether it's polling numbers or you know how many people believe such and such and I think it's had a profound effect on our society and our culture and Alma has written and worked on the whole idea of how numbers get used in terms of the political scene and I mean I think you maybe don't realize the amount of authority that we on the outside of your world project on to number and I'd like to understand that a little bit in terms of how it affects the other realities not just what the other realities are is that of interest to you Alma to me it's of interest but I'm in a company I mean I should say just that there's a I wonder I wonder to what degree this to conversation relate to one another I think that you absolutely right to the degree to which the reality or kind of so there's a very famous book in the history of mathematical by a that protocol trusty numbers which really deals to this question really of how making numerical argument have you know one in a sense why why and he has I mean the argument is much more complicated than this the history that he tells but this notion that you're saying that numbers have a certain kind of numerical argument has certain kind of validity that other sort of argument might not have but I wonder to what degree and I'm asking that back I mean to a degree that relates to the ontological question of number I don't know why I mean he's just a convention numbers used as conventions here when people make new argument based on kind of numbers or is it really has to do with that other question that we've been talking about until now which is down to existence the real existence of numbers so I'm kind of going to throw that back I would have thought that the reason why numerical arguments that use a lot of numbers tend to sound more convincing is just because they get the appearance precision and oftentimes they are more precise so it's clearer to see what the argument is that's not a very deep observation I suppose but amidst it's what is precision that's I think a deep question why is precision important yeah versus objective fact related to these things if you have one of mechanics or if you have a little dynamics and you solve a sort of problem then you get a solution and experiment coincides with that solution let's say in five digits after the comma and after that if you measure further than it deviates now you do quantum electrodynamics you get the next three digits correct and that in that sense precision might be an important thing to test your theory precision in terms of numbers but the way it is precision of a true value that you know I think I think the way in which we as physics I mean it is in theoretical physics or mathematical physics the way in which we apply let me say mathematics has nothing so much to do with numbers it's really what we apply is the it's the structure it's actually a qualitative feature that goes into the physics when you come from math and then of course when we solve it and we have equations you can have an equation and then it sits there but then you want to solve it and then you know you put in initial conditions and all this kind of stuff initial conditions are not something that I think mathematicians feel so much with they just have the former structure I mean yeah yes and no but I think another strategy of what I was trying to say since if we were more responsible I think we would find more precise arguments more compelling because a more precise statement is more easily is one for which it's more easy to figure out whether or not it's a correct yeah and people that are willing to assert responsibly who are responsible about making assertions will be willing to assert statements that are more easily falsifiable proportion to the degree to which they have evidence for them and so that in an ideal culture we would ideally try to state things that have a degree of precision proportionate to our evidence for them and maybe you know we're not obviously we're not there yet but given that is something that we could imagine as an idea what wouldn't surprise me that looking outside we think oh this is this guy saying something sounds very precise he must have really good reasons to say it like what the rocks said at least on this side can I bring in another reality where you see I think that some of these ideas about precision and the relationship or truth break down quite quickly right I mean take most of the things that we all believe to be true such as there's a certain amount of you know there's either finite or we're clearly finite but you know either an odd or even number of people in this room right or here this either even or number of people here right now that is in some sense not very precise it's not quantum mechanical fine resolution because from the quantum mechanical standpoint it's going to be hard to find the people here right but it's perfectly all right and objectively true and completely unproblematic and just true that there's either an odd or even number of people here even though probably no one in this room or not all scientists together in the world right now can tell you what one person is because we don't know what unifies an organism etc etc right so I think there are like very good exceptions to the rule that a scientifically rigorous statement that's not what Chris intended right with precision but I think that if if the scale of precision that we deploy and thinking about the objectivity of truth etc etc right is modeled along the lines of the progress of modern mathematical physics then I think we run into very serious political problems right so if you know like social problems cannot be tackled in this way clearly not now so you know like if we wonder you know the unification of physics and reduction is a hard enough problem but going from there to like making a real prediction was going to be the next president of the United States of America right there are very very many gaps right that you cannot fill out you we can fill them out as a world almost intra-ora right in a group of you know like here we can maybe figure out whether we should be reductionist about social facts or not right but in the real world you know where this stuff matters there's going to be a different form of precision right so and I think that it will be ultimately you know very problematic on the real level of social facts or political facts to think that you know decision procedures there should be mathematical or etc in that sense so there are different kinds of precision an example that one of my you know professors in philosophy always gave for this you know the relativity of precision problem is simply this right I mean you fall in love with a certain person right and then there's a degree of resolution of that person's phase in which you can still recognize the person and fall in love etc right if you come to close and you look at you know like whatever you know molecular details then then the object that you're dealing with in this particular case simply dissolves so I think there's no you know there's no absolute thing you know precision and that is the that is you know like be precise and then you're more likely to say something true I think quite often if we if we have precise mathematically we're going to say something false yeah not in mathematics right of course there's not a point about mathematics but we don't only think about mathematical objects if we think about them at all I think that's one of those wonderful places but pause to our conversation and maybe invite a few audience to come up and ask questions test some of you indicated that you believe that mathematical objects exist in the real universe and Roger Penrose next peg bar not not withstanding the fact of the matter is that we describe the physics of the real universe with abstract concepts like Euclidean or Riemannian geometry and differential equations and these are all based on abstract concepts that do not exist in the real universe a point a line a plane a manifold even a particle do not exist in the real universe so my question is can any one of you give me an example of a mathematical object or more specifically geometric object that you believe exists in the real universe then you would tell I mean I would have a question for you I would say I need a better grasp on what you think is a real the real universe because for some people this is real for some people that may be real well if you let's start with the most basic object in mathematics a point in geometry a point does a point exist in the real universe the mathematician who thinks about mathematical realism in the sense like Roger Penrose does yes well math it's mathematical realism but it's not physical realism there's no such thing as a physical point well but it is fact real things like what he says and let's say which I think we would say racism exists but you can't little point to well yeah racism racism exists but it can I don't believe that it can be described mathematically you think New York City system is correct do you think New York City exists in the real I believe I believe in existence but my question is using mathematics to describe exactly the existence of real objects is a fallacy it's an approximation at best even I want to say if you I mean as I do actually have a pluralistic worldview then I would say biological species exist in biological reality physical species exist in physical reality mathematical species exist in mathematical reality minds exist in mental reality and free will exists in free will reality I don't know you know okay but but my question my original question was I thought that some of you agreed with people like Penrose and Tegmark that mathematical mathematical objects actually exist in the real universe well that the real universe consists of what we call mathematical objects this is I have to apologize this is what's not the idea we just brought this up in order to have something to discuss right I'm not I don't I don't believe that here I thought some of you said that you do believe that not that I think okay oh I don't know maybe does anyone does anyone I don't even sure I understand what the question is okay yeah okay I have two questions for you the first is is there any work on whether this issue is decidable so as you said there are crucial issues in mathematics so they're being decided that we have discovered are not decidable and I'm wondering whether you feel that one can look at this question from the perspective of is it won't be possible ever for us to decide this issue is there any work going on in that arena which question is that exactly or whether math math objects are real or bad so this and the second question is this we are creatures formed from evolution we believe and there is some sense in which that limits how we can see the world and I'm wondering if there's any work on whether that inherently will affect the type of beliefs that we can come up with and the types of reality that we can come up with and whether that then plays into the the question of whether this is decidable or not so the two related questions well I think there's a lot of work I mean contemporary philosophy is like there's going to be huge landscape I don't know about philosophy of mathematics whether there's like a prominent like skeptical position right now where someone would say that you know the answer to the two certain ontological questions in philosophy of mathematics is somewhat unknowable or undecidable it's clearly not a prominent view I don't know if this but you know for any I think for any of the you know so that's that landscape is very rich and the other question you know this there's of course a huge literature and discussion about that I mean most recently now I think people are debating the Donald Hoffman book the case against reality right so this is a nice you know case for I think your second question you know the most recent version of neuroscience has discovered for such and such a reason we cannot know reality I think this is nonsense but it's a very widespread kind of argument Hoffman spoke the prompt I see how I didn't understand your answers whether there is serious work by specifically on the decidability of this question of the philosophy of mathematics question yes just general I don't know that's I would ask if I if you ask me you to ask I would ask how I feel so you see I can't hear it yes I'd say somebody else okay what I can say is there is an interesting book which collects dialogues between a mathematician I mentioned the name before Ella Kahn who isn't convinced a convinced playfulness in that sense with with a brain research person Jean-Pierre Jean-Jourg and they talk about this issue and it's a discussion it's it doesn't result of course there are two there are two points which they try to make over 250 pages and at the end you decide I'm sorry you know this is you know that book probably right sorry you know that book I don't know the title I'm trying to remember but if you if you go by the authors con co and nes and Jean-Jourg that's you find it okay well this I'm always bringing in the another issue but it relates to pluralism and it relates to painting in particular and also to the question previously painters have particularly always thought they want to find the truth or do they want to find the truth within the world of painting and early on in painting in the Renaissance they sought for linear perspective for anatomy for understanding the body and as painting evolved they became more and more involved in this very issue of what are they searching for are they searching for for simil for similitude in the world or are they searching for something ontological in terms of internal or external search and I think right now is a very pivotal time in the arts and particularly in painting which I know where there's a lot of confusion about the motivation for the creation of works of art and there are painters more in the in the 40s in during the wartime where they explored topological space they went against non non-neuclidean space and they attempted things but then when they dealt with it they didn't deal with it probably with the true logistics of the way a physicist or mathematician would deal with it but it's very much a pivotal issue do we do we follow what we what we are searching for internally in our internal brain structures or are we looking at the world precisely and trying to reproduce the world obviously painters and not can no longer no longer need to reproduce the world in the way they once did so I came today because I'm very fascinated by this very crux of problem ontology and epistemology in which many painters have arguments about with one another about what they're trying to do I don't know if you can even be good but just I just some of your thoughts may be on the possibility even of an art form entering any of this discussion I just want to say that there actually have been work on that have argued that the kind of there's this the moment of the turn of the century is a modernist transformation that there is relation between the modernist transformation in both arts and mathematics specifically so I'm thinking about the work of Jeremy Gray and I started mathematics that actually made the link specifically that the sort of question like you were saying about what is mathematics about what is painting about etc are actually quite similar so there have been I don't know but I can't answer the question right now I can say that they have been works that looked at this moment in the turn of the century and made that comparison directly and physics as well yes as part of exactly yeah yeah yeah yeah I mean I recommend that forthcoming book by this gentleman art and object it's a debate between Graham Hammond was the author of the book that I recommend and Michael Fried about this issue you might find that interesting so there's a whole recent trend in ontology of art you know which relates to that you know so that might be interesting looking you know Michael Fried set the tone for a long time but they're like recent ontological translators and philosophy of art that might speak to that question yeah because the traditional aesthetic theories don't really hold in terms of what the real problems are now or even in the middle of the 20th century yes yes that's why there's like a whole new like strand of theorizing about this which in the art world goes by the title of speculative realism so you might find that material interesting okay let me say one small one small thing it might be interesting to look in whether or not there are analogies in the philosophy of music so music that's a tone structure it has there's structures that musical pieces exemplify and there are similar questions about the ontology of music so is the is the symphony the the physical performance is it the physical inscription on the paper or is it an abstract object that's represented by those things and that's why one in the same symphony can be performed in different places it might it might be that because the nature of music is is more easily detachable from particular performances of it in a way that a painting doesn't seem to be that the questions will seem more parallel if we're considering those art forms rather than maybe architecture has some architecture would be another one to think about this is also this very interesting analogy i'm not sure whether it applies across the board but there are instances here where we hear we learn that mathematicians or physicists don't spend that much time worrying about their ontology many physicists and i think mathematicians would say well that's good and if we need to we'll look at it and if we're interested in it we might look at it the question is is that a good prescription for painters or artists as well should be spending a lot of time thinking about the ontological implications or is that really what art is about is a good idea or a bad idea to focus on that should they do that more if it didn't mathematicians or physicists say i'm not sure i know the answer but similarly what what would you how does the following sound to you you know uh philosophers are currently discussing whether they should spend any time on doing mathematics right i think this would be like a bad headline and i think similarly the other headline is equally bad mathematicians now this and physicists now uh you know think that they should do less ontology i think it's equally bad uh you know and just go back to the great moment you know we you mentioned the foundation foundational crisis and quantum mechanics etc you know Einstein wrote you know like one of my colleagues we just moved him from Caltech he added Einstein's papers he spent a lot of time reading neo-contian philosophy literature writing reviews which are now published with the Einstein papers etc and so forth for the other great figures and that might not have been a coincidence that often physicists right now worry about the grand unification and when it's coming and then they are doing honestly speaking incompetent metaphysics like uh max tech marker i think this is terrible metaphysics what's going on there or Donald Hoffman is just an incompetent philosopher of mind and so you know like so that's you know he has bad news neuroscientists care uh care much less about ontology right now that's what's bad news saying this is good or bad i think this is terrible equally bad because it's good on philosopher who doesn't care about mathematics you know that's wrong the baby with the bath water because you know you can do bad metaphysics as he i mean i agree with you and then typically what physicists have you know learned to say is when someone does metaphysics at all it's all automatically bad physics or bad metaphysics but there is very helpful metaphysics also of course someone mentioned the name of john bell i don't know you you mentioned john bell came up with actually two metaphysical assumptions and then he derived for one of the assumptions classical local reality and inequality by which you can test whether this assumption is right or wrong so you can make you can make empirical tests that are motivated by metaphysics but then it has to be good metaphysics yes of course i think i think with the artist or with painters it's really the study of the brain because i don't think it can really be controlled what they're thinking in categories i think very often that the arts come closest to an attempt at some kind of unification of the intellect the mind the emotions and so therefore it's very hard to say well don't think about this only think about that because the act of creation is an exploration and a search for where they stand and where how they relate to the world so i i think the divisions are very dangerous in terms of creativity and probably in science too if you go deep into it i don't know enough i have a good i'm sorry i want to dominate this but since we are talking about art now it's uh i this is not directly about ontology and episode but it has to do with it there was this German artist who was made ridiculous who was ridiculed by many people joseph boys joseph boys had really he had a philosophical philosophical talent to some extent and in terms of his actions he did this action art even here in new york in new york city the the the the action with the coyote i mean i don't what what what boy's did conceptually was he undercut the subject object distinction because he as the artist made himself an object of his own art by the action so he this is this is i think remarkable it's it's a great idea just to show people that um it's not that here's the artist and here is the painting he just puts himself into that room and together with the coyote right and and he does it in such a way that people were standing there and looking through the glass through the window and wouldn't go away for hours because they thought something must be happening and nothing happened except he was lying there with his side i don't know you know all these these stuff that he usually brings with him and then there's the coyote you know that was amazing and people but of course they they were getting angry because they were expecting something and nothing happened but they didn't go away amazing then see he really had this talent to to do something that is philosophically highly relevant in a way that affects people it was just i mean i'm just you know what it's the same i'm just going to say that the history of art is a good place to look for a history of the of the value attached to precision because there are different periods when a precision is considered an important value but then it doesn't always mean the same thing and in fact it can take opposite meanings and this is also this is not unrelated to the history of objectivity as analyzed in the book of dastard and gallisin which again with the valence objectivity in that case is the value but what it means takes it becomes moves to its opposite from one time yeah i just wanted to say also as far as ontology and mathematics there is a small group of mathematicians who are talking to philosophers it's called the n category cafe and the it's been online for quite some time the original motivation was precisely the the some concern or not necessarily concern about the development of mathematical practices that were not based on on the axioms of set theory specifically that were uh and the but what i've noticed is that the this there's not any much interaction between this uh this circle which was mathematicians and philosophers and physicists and the rest of uh philosophy so there's a lot of researching ontology in europe and france in particular of category theory as a matter of fact so that idea i've also like happened to have written something about this so there there's uh you know there's just a little more there but yeah so that issue you know like given that so category theory was uh you know like people became aware of this and it's through interaction with mathematicians yes yes through self-centaction actually with some of the founding fathers actually in the most in the french context yeah okay i'm not familiar with this but this this is a different because this is there are mathematicians from various different fields this is because to keep the category theory so we're working we're talking to the french philosophers were category theory that was that was what they did they were not yeah they were somewhat isolated within mathematics yes this is something different as well as the question i have a question about history and it was mentioned that um in popular imagination the fourth dimension at the beginning of the last century and then when i was a kid watching tv watching twilight zone uh i think his name was surling he talks about a fifth dimension and now we're in the internet age and we were during the introduction uh we talked about the three audiences the audience in this room the audience beyond this room the future audience that might be looking at the archive of this event and many of us who are observing and participating right now may be in that audience right it's because when this is uploaded we can all look at it so i guess my question is about the the culture and how um the past present and future is changing so quickly um and how our participation in the technology is accelerating that and there's a buzzword post truth i'm sure we've all heard that um and what that could possibly mean so i guess my general question is about um um what is all this how is this impacting our culture and our our imagination and our politics it's sort of a broad question and if there's anything you know now that you did not know at the beginning of this conversation i would be very curious about that thank you i know that i have to withdraw some of my projections onto math that's very important lesson and also i've been thinking about daniel connamans uh endowment principle of how much what we endow is having value because we know it or we have that changes our perception of it and its value in the world and throughout this conversation i've been thinking about that that whole endowment principle idea yeah anyone else yeah i was i i actually wanted to ask you that later tonight what do you think of don hoffman's book but now i know yes yes this is the shortest story you know i've been working i run a research center called reality in crisis a center for the human being in the digital age it's a large international research network uh with stands disciplines here at uh and my u university of tokyo picking university and paris and kamrich in the future and um and so it's uh it deals with all these uh post truth etc phenomena on various levels so i think that yes let me be very brutal about this i think that some of this hoffman's down material is you know what people worried about here in the 90s in particular in philosophy about you know post modernism and so forth giving up the truth and richard rorty and so forth i think the the kind of incoherence what really people worried about this has now infiltrated politics neuroscience but other disciplines too you know like rovelli the way in which rovelli speaks about physics and nobility i think it's the same so i think that's like a whole i call i call the this climate of uh mr. gotten conceptions of knowledge uh food Kantianism you know it's the worst of hoffko and the worst of kant and it's also crazy Kant food Kant it's also it's a valgus form of nichianism and i think donald trump you know like if you look at this you know nicha it's the first of what nicha calls the blonde beast and uh and this whole post truth thing i mean there you know everything that we worried about you know decades ago from philosophies like you know now this has come become a principle almost everywhere and uh i think there's a lot uh uh of work for philosophers to be done and in many in europe the contemporary philosophical trends are therefore often associated with a label of realism new realism that's just my word and speculative realism and this realism and that realism and the reason why in particular philosophers in europe have you know moved to the realist camp broadly speaking right uh is you know resisting that we have a long version of it you know the in germany uh the christian democrats fun since people don't think about this you know you think about the far right when you think about political problems in germany but we have the christian democrats that's nasty i shouldn't have said that on the record no christian democrats are right i did say that was the last question but we will have one one last question now but yeah the hoffman sorry i'll make a call of purpose sorry me too actually well i suppose this has to do with realism um in veda there there's 40 aspects well one is yoga and there was this patanjali who cognized it four chapters the third chapter is called city sidhi and sanskrit often translated as perfection power uh supernormal ability attainment the cities are listed as things like levitation walking through walls and visibility strength of an elephant um being in multiple bodies at the same time knowledge of past and future knowledge of the contents and nature of other people's minds uh challenges to our understanding of reality and veda deals with these seven states of consciousness uh neurophysiological states of consciousness beyond the first three being waking dream you've sleep so we've been talking a lot is about mathematics as kind of a one application mathematics is to describe physical reality but here you have a physical reality which is you know right here i mean in the room if some of these things um actually exist which doesn't seem to be challenged um so what are your thoughts about this uh this knowledge has you know quite serious um history and uh maybe i can't say two things about this there have been attempts to actually in some of the labs particularly in the u.s even in prince then to demonstrate phenomena like this and much of that has been shown to be um some experiments haven't been done well designed some experiments have been well analyzed and so i'm doubtful about that material but still there are other situations in which these cases happen spontaneously i mean not under under laboratory conditions and then um my first reaction would be is that really something that fits into the range of validity of physical theories i mean i think we all agree that the world does not only consist of consist of physics and physical reality right there's more to determine that and for instance what we do not understand at all up to the present day uh not withstanding all all neuroscience and brain and stuff and so on it's the relationship between the mental and the physical we don't have any clue we can measure correlations but we don't know where they come from what they do and so on i don't know what science will bring us when we understand this better i'm not saying that we can explain this all this all then but i'm only saying that it is maybe not the not the best reaction to try and ask physics to explain that because it maybe may go far beyond what physics is designed for it to explain so well thank you everyone for an excellent afternoon and i'm looking forward to looking at this for years to come on youtube alright??? Cerecius The Aldewe 3 It's not always the case)- Now never submit plan nothing something good nothingreq whats what huhevery fabric there whole I feel itschallously Atherine