 Welcome everybody. I'm Rob Penzer, I'm the associate director of the Helix Center and thank you for being here today. I want to make a few announcements before I introduce our participants today. On Saturday, February 7th, the sublime experience will have Amir Axel, a mathematician and author of the celebrated Fermat's last theorem. Paul Fry, the William Lamson Professor of English at Yale. Alan Richardson, Professor of English at Boston College, and Sandra Shapshe, Associate Professor of Philosophy at Indiana and Bloomington. Then on Saturday, February 21st, particle fever, the quest, it will be both a morning and afternoon program will be screening the film particle fever, Mark Levinson's award-winning 2013 documentary for which Helix Center Executive Committee member, Carla Solomon, was a producer. It tells the remarkable story of the monumental search for the Higgs Boson, the elementary force particle that was predicted by the standard model of particle physics. Following the morning screening in its entirety, we will have at least one roundtable. We're working on the possibility of two, but among the participants, producers Carla Solomon and Andrea Miller will be joined by Alberto Mangro. Canada's most distinguished man of letters, Lisa Randall, Harvard theoretical particle physicist and cosmologist, and Jean Strauss, the acclaimed biographer of Morgan and others, director of the New York Public Library's Coleman Center for Scholars and Writers. Then on Saturday, March 7th, we have apprehending consciousness among the participants, David Chalmers, Professor of Philosophy and Co-Director of the Center for Mind, Brain and Consciousness at NYU, and Pete Hutt, Professor of Astrophysics and Head of the Program for Interdisciplinary Studies at the Institute for Advanced Study. And then Saturday, March 14th, we'll have a program on curiosity at which Alberto Mangro will again distinguish our roundtable. So watch for further announcements about those. Now on to today's program. One of our participants is coming from upstate and head to dig out of the snowfall, so he'll be joining us shortly, we understand. But as I say your name, if you can raise your hand, so the audience members recognize you. Now Armani, Armani is a master ethnic percussionist, multi-instrumentalist and composer currently based in New York City. His music career began at age six as a classical piano student and singer with the Spanish National Choir in Orchestra, and he now works as a producer, performer, therapeutic musician and educator. Beyond his early classical training, Nacho has studied traditional rhythms from around the world specializing in North African and Flamenco rhythms. He has a degree in pedagogy and philosophy from the Universidad completence de Montreud. He has taught classes at many conservatories and universities and is a faculty member at the New York Open Center's Sound and Music Institute. He's developed drawing programs from incarcerated women and juveniles, rhythm and tempo based groups for children with pervasive developmental disorders, as well as adapted live percussive sound for clinical use in pediatric therapeutics. His innovative technique of elemental sounds and rhythms is based on natural patterns of growth that promote brain function and body alignment. His critically acclaimed first album, Silence Light, in 2007 with the Nacho Armani World Flamenco Sex Tet was counted one of the ten top jazz albums of the year by All About Jazz. He's performed and recorded with Lionel Luke, if I'm saying his name correctly, Liz Wright and Angelique Quijo, among others. He's composed, produced and performed the 2014 In Time, a nine CD rhythm based music listening therapeutic method to improve brain function in collaboration with Sheila Allen and advanced brain technologies. Edgar Chouery, his professor of applied physics at the Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Department of Princeton University, and associated faculty in the Department of Astrophysical Sciences program in plasma physics. He's also director of Princeton University's engineering physics program and chief scientist at the university's electric propulsion and plasma dynamics lab for advanced spacecraft propulsion. He's the president of the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society and also director of Princeton's 3D audio and applied acoustic slab. The profile of Edgar by Adam Gopnik appeared in the January 28, 2013 New Yorker, music to your ears, the quest for 3D recording and other mysteries of sound, in which he was described as quote, a distinctly modern type engineer, a steed, unquote. Vijay Iyer, a Grammy nominated composer pianist who was described by Pitchfork as quote, one of the most interesting and vital young pianists in jazz today, by the Los Angeles Weekly as a boundless and deeply important young star and by Minnesota public radio as an American treasure. He was recently named Downbeat Magazine's 2014 pianist of the year, a 2013 MacArthur Fellow and a 2012 Dara Stuke performing artist. The New York Times observes there's probably no frame wide enough to encompass the creative output of the pianist Vijay Iyer. He's released 20 recordings, most recently for the ECM label. These latest include mutations featuring his compositions for piano, string, quartet and electronics. Rade, Rade, am I saying that correctly? Rade, Rade. Rights of Holly, a silent film by Prashant Bhargava with his score performed by International Contemporary Ensemble and the forthcoming break stuff featuring the Vijay Iyer trio held by pop matters as quote, the best band in jazz. In 1999, Vijay received an interdisciplinary PhD in the cognitive science of music from the University of California, Berkeley. His dissertation, subsequent research and creative work are focused on embodied music cognition. He's published articles in numerous journals and anthologies and in the forthcoming Oxford Handbook of Critical Improvisation Studies. He is the Franklin D. and Florence Rosenblatt Professor of the Arts in the Department of Music at Harvard University. Vijay Iyer's trio's new album, Break Stuff, is out February 10th. Marina Carcicova-Cran is a professional pianist and scholar in music cognition. Her research is focused on emotional responses to music and on the perception of melodic transformation. Currently Marina teaches music cognition at Turo College and she performs regularly as a member of Union City Chamber Players and is the author of books and scientific papers her latest book being Music as Magical Journey, the story of tonal gravity melodic objects and motion in tonal space which makes a friendly introduction to the science of music. Tristan Parrish who is on his way is a composer and sound artist whose work is inspired by the aesthetic simplicity of math, physics and code. Wire magazine described his compositions as an austere meeting of electronic and organic. One bit music, his 2004 release was the first album ever released as a microchip programmed to synthesize his electronic composition live. His latest circuit album, One Bit Symphony, has received critical acclaim, New York press calling it sublime and the Wall Street Journal saying its oscillations have an intense hypnotic force and a surprising emotional depth. His award-winning work coupling One Bit Electronics with traditional forms in both music such as his work active field and observations and visual art in his machine drawings and micro tonal wall has been presented around the world from sonar and arse electronica to the Museum of Modern Art and Bit Forms galleries. Without further ado, our panel. Well I'll ask what sounds like a stupid question but I would be interested to hear what my fellow panelists would say if I asked what is music because I don't really know if there is a stable definition of it. There is no, this is the most amazing art and for me, and a professional musician and scholar and music technician, music is a sorcery. It's a magical thing. We can learn about the foundations of music, about the elements of music, the sources of music but why music affects us so deeply and what ways music is able to deliver not just emotions and they are not basic emotions, they are complex emotions and even general ideas. This is still, it's a magic. And the most amazing thing about music is its accessibility. Everybody understands what music is and music is able to reach everybody. It's a truly universal language that has no barriers, it affects everybody. People with no music education, people with no musical training, people with different cultures are able to understand the heart of music even when they listen to exotic music. My own research shows that people with no musical training, not only feel with great precision, the most important elements of music but they also are able to recognize musical styles as a technology for music, musicologists. If I was asked to give a definition about this music, kind of a very dry definition, I would say music is a distribution of perceived tonal tension along the era of time, artful distribution. You said perceived tonal tension. Yes, because perceived tonal tension, it's the main morphological principle of music and it's so primitive that it's exactly this primitive nature of music communication that makes music available for everybody. And we feel tonal tension on the level of muscle responses. With their visceral responses, their subconscious, their intuitive responses, we don't need to be trained, we just need to be born into human society and have normal hearing. We don't need special training to understand the language of music and the foundations of melodic elements of music that in the physics of sound, this is another important thing that we are dealing with just direct context section, intersection of the physics of sound and human neurobiology. And of course it's a cultural construct available only to people. Just to fill you, we started with UJ's question, what is music? Sorry, I'm... You're not ready. Hi, everybody. Are we kind of all offering our answers? Gosh, well, I'll give you a shot. I mean, I guess if we take for granted the perception of pitch, then we're talking about higher level things, like the organization of sound over time and rhythm and these things that probably we all respond to in a variety of different ways, I think that our perception of music comes from a lot of different interacting things. So more social, some are physical, some are more cognitive, I'm sure, and some are just purely aesthetic, whatever. Maybe that's something... That's what I took from the last part of what you're talking about, but I might be misinterpreting it. But one of the ways that, at least I interact with music a lot and where the music that I write comes from is finding this intersection between simple patterns, things that we can understand on a very basic cognitive level. Things like repeating structures, simple rhythms, simple melodies that build up into forms that are more complex than those parts, but nonetheless based on these very simple ideas that we can understand. And part of that for me is that that is taps into the part of our experience of the world where we are attracted to things that we can understand. And so an example of that is if you learn about biology, then you can understand how the animal form can grow from some simple biological rules, or if you understand physics, and you can understand the sort of more basic ways of building blocks of nature form complex things. And we find beauty in that simplicity. I think we can connect on a sort of profound way, and clearly I'm just jumping in because I just ran up from the car, but I think we can connect to these things that we can understand in a different way than just something that's more aesthetic or more resonant. I think that when we can understand something, when it gives us something to latch onto, then we can find some sort of beauty in that. And that is true in a lot of different art forms and how we see nature, but also true in the perception of music, I think. I think I just brought up too many different points there. Well, for me, I see and I understand music like a multi-dimensional experience. For me, music is an experience, which is really, really hard to record. We do that, right? But we know, unless we developed three-dimensional immersive sound, that music engages so many different levels of the human being. And the most important thing, as I'm saying, is an experience, really hard to reproduce again. Engaging different parts of the brain, different parts of the body with resonance, the brain with entrainment, just these two simple basic principles of music, like resonance, like vibration, the reason really engaging the body in every cell of the body, and entrainment engaging the brain, right? So these two elements, for me, are the most important thing. It would talk about more like principles of sound, resonance, and entrainment. But for me, above all, music is a tool for transformation. A tool is pure technology that has been used for thousands of years in different communities of the world as service to the community for challenges, for really, really go through daily life. Why? Because all these principles, right? But music has been in cultures through the very first thing. Sound, basic, before music, is what I want to talk about. It's the source of life. Sounds promote movement. Sounds really create vibration, and we are vibration. We were discussing in Atlanta, it's like our favorite relationship with the world when we were nine months in the womb of the mother. Our relationship with the world is through sound, is through vibration. So that's how we codify emotions, that's how we codify language and information. And it's really interesting because if you pay attention when we were in the womb, our ears are plucked. So how we perceive sound? We perceive sound through vibration, through bone conduction sound. And then I'm going to do a little experiment with you. Can I do it? Sure. So does anybody, can I hear this? Can you listen? Can I do something with you? Do you mind if I put this on your head? It's all right? You sure? Okay. So let's do this. Now anybody can hear this? All right. Can you give us the tone? How is it possible? Because sound moves through our bones. Through vibration sound and through our bones connects directly to our inner ear, which is you know what? The cochlea is one of the first, first, first things that is developed in uterus. To get information through life through sound. So this is, we are vibrational beings. And through vibration we codify life. So just to remark these principles, but remind us, remind also this cultural effect of sound for communities. How sound and rhythm has been always there as a tool for the communities to transform and go through their life processes. That's why I understand music. I should confess that I don't have a faintest idea what music is on a fundamental level. And I have even a problem drawing a line between perception of sound, which is you were describing almost primordial activity and music itself. And that line seems to me very culturally conditioned. What is a simple tone for you could be music with somebody else? What is a core tone singer in Arabia could make somebody one out of the room, could charm somebody else? So these are all, I find the line shifts so much that from a scientific level, I can give a definition which is almost banal that music is sound that gives someone pleasure, to some extent, who moves you. And that's really not very prevalent, doesn't tell you much. But only then I can have a definition. Anything beyond that is so culturally conditioned, so complex, so beautiful and so powerful. And that it kind of evades pinpointing as a definition. And particularly enchanted or terribly interested in how humans interact with the spatial aspect of the sound. And it's interesting because we experience sound on a daily basis, not just as pitch, rhythm, melody, extent in time, repetition, and so on, timbre. We experience it as localized in space somewhere or moving in space somewhere. Yet it doesn't, in music, because we have limitation in performance, we cannot make violin fly around the room. So it seems to be a limited extent to which spatialization has been used in composition. To give you an example of what I think, why I think spatial aspect is terribly important in music and one component that now with technology can be for the first time really used as part of the palette of the musician. Imagine waking up in the morning nicely to the sound of a bird song right outside your window. Very nicely we all love bird songs and composers wrote great music based on bird songs. So that's one day. Now imagine the same exact experience, the same bird, the same melody, and the same melody wake up that you go through except this time the bird is inside the room with you. And it would be very unnerving because first your mind tells you from the river, from the acoustics of the room, you know right away your brain knows that way there's a bird trapped in the room. So there's an anxiety being trapped with a wild animal is not something, even a bird can be threatening. So on one day the experience is that of musical experience that's blunning, that's very comforting. On the next day with that bird trapped in the room the spatial aspect of the sound which is the only thing that has changed can be terrifying, can create anxiety, you have a bird trap in your room. So I'm very interested in how the spatial aspect of the sound can tremendously color your connection or your experience of the musicality of the sound. And I'm very interested, I'm not a musician, I'm a scientist, I study the interaction of humans with how humans perceive sound, especially how humans perceive the localization of sound. And I'm very interested from sitting among musicians to hear how if I give you today a technique where you can project sound anywhere in space and play it back for your listeners anywhere in space, which we can do almost right now for the first time using advanced computers and technologies, how would you use it as a musician? So that's the next question I want to put around the table as musicians, how would you use such a pillar, such a tool? Imagine the entire space is now your canvas, so you're not limited to just pitch rhythm you know melody and so on, but now you can say I want to violin to come from infinity, come whisper in my ear, fly off and then I want somebody to whisper my other ear song as opposed to sing always from a speaker in front of you. So, at least for me, that's something that I'm specifically not trying, I'm trying to do the opposite of that in my own work, I'm trying to make us very aware of the sound source as a point in space coming from a physical material so that if you play a note on a pitch on a violin that we are as listeners very aware of this string vibrating in space as bowed by this hair of this bow with a little bit of friction and the resonance of the body of the violin amplifying that sound and spreading outwards from a location over there coming towards us. But that is the stationization in his home. But it's one that's extremely explicit and very direct and very much tied into our experience of sound, like you said about that we typically think about sound as coming from points or when it's from the ocean we kind of think of it as a spatial thing but still very much delineated in space. And for whatever reason, this is just me and I'm not meaning to close off your inquiry at all, but I'm interested in this sort of separation almost. A separation that just makes us more aware of what we're experiencing, this kind of, I guess is the idea that the piece of music for me is, and this is why I think live sound is so important as opposed to recording for instance, is that the piece of music is an experience that's unfolding by the means of physics in space with us as listeners and our experience of that music is very much tied to the sound production in space. Would it be fair to say that in a sense your one bit music sort of underscores the aspects of the embodied music cognition by disembodying it in a certain sense? Well, yeah, I should say I work actually a lot with electronics even though I'm interested in acoustic instruments, but the way I work with electronics is very low level. I use this one bit waveforms which are just on and off, also, of electricity that make the speaker membrane move in and out like this and create sound. It's a very, very primitive approach to electronic sound. And a lot of that is to make us aware of the speaker as an instrument. And I would call that embodied and I'd even maybe go a step forward to say that it's trying to make us aware of how the electronics are even working, that the more we can see that system is something very mechanical and physical, the less magic it has, and the more we can kind of be connected to it experientially. But that's really just my approach, which is this very kind of concrete approach. But in experiencing the sound, the listener is listening the sound that has been reflected off surfaces around him or her reaching their ear. So the reverb is part of the experience. But that's what I'm referring to, being able to control that or use it as part of your own palette, and not actively you're not when you compose the one bit music. But to what extent you feel that the entire spatial aspect of the reproduction is important to the listener? Yeah, well, it's very important. But for me, that's an aspect of the performance of a piece of music in a space. And like us in this room hearing our voices reflect... That's very informal for acoustic music, production is to reproduce the reverb of a room. And when you have a 3D audio technique to do that, you can then create the illusion that you are in a real space or actually produce a real space, which for the first time now can be done. Well, it's really interesting because my approach to music is always from traditions, traditional music, but always music and sound happens in space, always. Yeah, I want to tell something about the space in music. So on one hand, we are dealing with acoustics. And acoustics is about vibration and some medium it could be. Air or water, it could go through metal, through bone. And this is the basically space of acoustics, of the physical sound. But when we are talking about music, as we all understand, so this is a pitch being something which is made of melodies and harmonious, we discuss very different space. It's a space of tonal relationships. And it's kind of very, very separated from acoustics because you can take the same melody, let's say, Mary had a little lamp. Somebody could start playing it on violin and other person would finish it singing. So the timbers differ, violin could be on a radio and somebody would finish it on the radio, so physical space is different. But the melody is the same. It has, it's an object, it's a melodic shape, which can be divided between different players and it can be produced in different spaces. But still we feel it is something united because this melody exists in tonal space. And not long time ago, there was a very interesting book written by a very interesting person. They can serve as a philosopher, Rogers Groton, who, the book has named the Stégixo music. Rogers Groton, he's not only author of more than 40 books, mostly on philosophy, he's a conscientious philosopher. But he's also a composer of two operas, Stégix and Prague. So in this book, he reminded about so-called acasmatic space. This word came from ancient Greece, acasmaticus, that was the name for the students of Pythagoras. Rogers used to lecture from behind the screen, so not to distract their attention, so they will listen to them. So when we listen to music, we listen to shapes, to ideas, we go into this special space which transcends acoustics. It's not just sound production, it's not just sound events, those sound events that they came together into melodies and harmonic sequences thanks to special forces, forces of tonal attraction. And what is amazing about music, it's actually a fantastic thing about music, that the music we are doing, the phenomenal space of tones of phenomenal gravity, because the main thing about tonal system of reference, which is just musical scale, that the tones differ in their frequencies, and this is acoustical characteristics, but they differ in psychophysics, they differ in the degree of attraction to tonal center. It's very easy to illustrate, may I? I have to go to the piano just one second to make it every particular. Okay. And you usually have just seven basic elements. Two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight. Just seven basic elements. All the incredible wealth of music that we know today. It's made just of seven basic elements. And they are repeated again and again because space of music is organized cyclically. It's the same seven names. This is how we got 88 keys on the piano. So playing with just seven notes, basic elements, we are able to create incredible compositions and incredible structures. And we feel motion and music because we have stable tones. And unstable tones. This is unstable. This is stable. So all we have in music, it's a playing with tonal attraction within the field of tonal gravity. It's gravitational forces. And this is so simple to perceive that music is available for everybody. Already newborn have different patterns of brain activation for dissonant. And consonant. Already two months old recognized that this is pleasant to the air. And this is not. They are born with musical expertise. And when they listen to music, it's tonal space. I guess I would find this particular construction to be pretty specific to Western culture. And even the idea that music comes from only the interaction of tones and tension and release in that particular way is very much a product of Western culture and Western thought. And I think you would probably agree. You would too that there are a lot of other ways of putting music together and also a lot of ways of experiencing music. I think what you're calling dissonant. It was to hide in. It was less dissonant to Mozart. And even less dissonant to Brahms. And certainly not really dissonant at all to someone like Schoenberg. And there's also the possibility of incorporating a certain amount of tension into what you might call a sound that produces pleasure, which is how you just define music. So in the same way that with food, we can accommodate a certain amount of bitterness in the course of a meal. Like if I had a shot of espresso, which I just did, I mean I had, even though I'm not acting like I did, but I did. You know, that can be pleasurable too. This thing that we might perceive as tense is actually useful at the moment. And I think also stability is relative. I mean if you listen to blues, it has dominant chords as stable entities, you know. And if you listen to someone like Phonius Monk, he will incorporate roughness like the auditory experience of tones rubbing against each other as part of the aesthetic, you know. And that can be, we can tolerate a certain amount of roughness and in fact even enjoy it. In the course of musical experience. I guess I've been, you know, I've still, I'm thinking back to my first, my opening question because I've been trying to see if there's a way that we're all talking about the same thing. And I'm not actually sure that we are yet. It's not, we don't even have to exactly, but my, I suppose in particular we've been talking about music as something that happens to us, so that we perceive or receive, which means that generally it seems that we think of music as not our own doing, but somehow coming from somebody else. And so I guess I just think back to, well a friend of mine Gary Tomlinson, he's a professor at Yale, and he has a book about to come out, I think it comes out in a week or so, called Musicking the First Million Years. And as you know, we as a species are only a tenth of that in terms of our own, you know, but the amount of time that we've been on this planet as homo sapiens, so what could he possibly be talking about? And these are the kinds of questions that I'm interested in, because if we're going to start making assertions about the cognitive universals of music, like that everybody in the world hears something as dissonant or something like that, we have to make sure that we're really talking about everybody in the world. And for me it makes more sense to start from the opposite end, which is, what must it have been like to be not yet human, for example, but find yourself walking early hominids. You know, when you go to the Museum of Natural History, the sort of canonical scene of early hominids, or as a little nuclear family walking through the woods or something like that, right? So just imagine that experience, and imagine that you start hearing each other walking in sync, like you hear the footsteps starting to synchronize, and then could that be the beginning of what we're calling music? In other words, is music actually come from not just sound of anything, but sound of us? Because that to me is what makes the most sense. If we're going to talk, we're going to even use this word, which is a very fuzzy word. And I mean, for me the biggest problem is I don't know where music stops. You know, if we say it starts in a certain place, like it starts with sound, or it starts with tonal gravity, or it starts with rhythm, where does it end? What's the other side? Like is there an experience that is not music? And that is actually there's no answer to that, because it's going to entirely a cultural decision about what the boundary of this thing that we call music is. In fact, it's bound up with our name for it. You know, we say this is music. But the other thing it's bound up with is that we in the last hundred years have gotten used to receiving music without seeing it. So basically we have in our midst, like in everyday life, the equivalent of acoustmatic music, which is what we call recorded music, you know. And that's only been around for a hundred years. And if you think about music in the less million years, the less even hundred thousand years that humans have been here, a hundred years doesn't make, doesn't have any significance, evolutionarily speaking. So we evolved to something that we were before we had recorded music, which was to hear each other making sound, right? Not just to hear sound in general, but to hear each other. That's what we're really good at doing. I mean, we've evolved to be really good at hearing each other. We can hear footsteps. If I hear footsteps, I can tell if it's a man or a woman most of the time. I mean, that's statistically true that most of the time you can tell. And in fact, that's so true that when people audition for the symphony, they also audition behind a curtain. And not only that, but they put the carpet down so that they can't hear your footsteps, because it was found that people who, you know, decide who's the best in these auditions were somehow being implicitly sexist. So they actually conceal gender in order to get the best players. So that's how good we are at hearing each other, that we can hear properties of somebody's body just by hearing them walking, for example. And we're also really good at hearing our environments. My graduate advisor had a moment in the early 70s where he got to hang out with Stevie Wonder. And at the time Stevie Wonder was making Intervision's or Talking Book of one of those albums. And so my friend got to go with Stevie Wonder to the head of what was at the time Columbia Records, which is at the top of the Sony building. And they wrote an elevator up to the top floor. And you exit the elevator into this pyramid-shaped atrium. So Stevie Wonder comes out of the elevator and he says, you just stood there for a second and he said, there's something up this room. It's like the walls are triangular or something like that. So that's how good we are at hearing space, you know, hearing the space around us. But that's partly because we've evolved to perceive each other. I want to talk to many things I actually strongly about and mostly very, very much what you said. One thing mentioned early on when commenting on Marina's little experiment is the fact that what we perceive as something, let's say an unstable or atonal, can evolve taste-wise, can evolve across even the same culture, technically going from Hadeh to Schoenberg. But also as I said earlier, can evolve across culturally. It could be something dissonant and nice. But there are, it turns out, going to some recent research, some very, very universal feelings we get from some sounds, which are almost common to all of us, will have to do with our evolution. For example, it's been shown quite recently with research on how we interact with reverberation, late reflections, that if I take, if I give you headphones or if I can simulate 3D sound from speakers and simulate the sound of very early reflections. In other words, make a click and make it sound as if it's coming to you very early from, the reflections come to you here very early. You will be very anxious. All of us will be very anxious. Almost 100% of subjects feel anxiety of some sort. Because that simulates the sound of what happens if you're trapped in a corner. And your brain knows that this is, as humans, have to evolve in getting away from danger that we are trapped. Now, if I take you to an anicoid chamber, and I have one in my lab, or if you go on an anicoid chamber, or it's similar if you stay in the wild in the open, there are no reflections. And there, almost all humans have a sense of enhanced alertness, or you know, we have a sense of alertness. It has to do with the fact that we are exposed to danger. We don't get any reflections, that means we are totally open. So holes are designed to have just the right amount of reverb. What I'm getting into is something you touched on, where is the limit of what music is. If I define music as simply as I designed earlier, which is a sound that gives us some kind of feelings, or emotions, or pleasure, then it seems to me the limit is almost nowhere. It's almost to the point where even a verb by itself can just, the reverb of this click in the room only open can give us anxiety, all of us, or give us pleasure. And I found that tremendous that we have these fundamental mechanisms, probably have to do with the fact that we have to survive, or worry about predators coming at us, and feeling trapped or not trapped. Absolutely, we react to auditory stimuli. That's true. Just, I think we are discussing about music as. And there are different directions, for example, with music by Exynarchus, which was very popular to recently. And he used random numbers to create something really interesting. And some of his creations are very beautiful, but this is not exactly what we would tell, name music, because still today we understand music, something which is made of melodies and harmonies, something you would think to your child, or recognize its familiar melody. And music really gives people pleasure, by the way. Music activates biological reward pleasure, nuclear circumference, which also reacts to sex and food. Even sad music, because it gives us pleasure. Even Zenokus? He used random numbers to cast it. No, I'm asking you, does Zenokus give us pleasure? I found it interesting. But that's not what I'm asking you. I'm asking you to spare the... I don't know, but it is. Yes, it still did research. I think what happened, because I was bitten by a scientific bug, so I'm looking for precise data. So when we're talking about melodic universals, and when I say the universals, it's not just conjecture. It means that people around the world recognize octave, which is the first overtone of harmonic series. And octave to just a thousand years ago was sometimes substituted with fifth quinta, which is the next overtone. My point is that melodic elements are defined by the physics of sound. If you have two harmonic series, two different tones, which have the beginning of the harmonic series, overlapped, the strongest overtones, overlapped. They perceive as dissonant, most likely it's related to the neuronal cost of processing. It's easy to process. It makes this event silent. And also another thing... Can I just ask... When you ask someone, do you perceive this as dissonant, even in a scientific setting, there's already culture around them to figure out what that even means. Yeah, but octave is not culture. Caul octave is octave around the world, even for Australians that do not have melodies. I mean, I'm a britianist. I don't want to be obnoxious. They don't have melodies and harmonious that European music has, but they do recognize octave. My point is that melodic elements, they are not ordered by somebody. It's a discovery of human mind, discovered through all visceral reactions. And as far as tonal tension and release, we know about music by Schonberg and his students, Bergen Webern, who wrote the 12 tone music. Basically, they try to escape the dictatura of tonal tension. In the music they use noble technique of polyphony. They would take......creat a melody made of all chromatic tones, never repeating any of the tones, so to avoid any tonal attraction, any preference, any hierarchy. And they would work with this series. They would invert it, they used it in different timbers, they would... when Caul up said, nobody sings those melodies. It's interesting music. But when we talk about blues, it's still tension and release. If you start to play for us, we would immediately recognize that this sounds less tense than this. That's Marina. Yes. If we go more than 500 years ago, we will not even talk about music about this in these terms. We will not talk at any time, we just do it. And that will be enough. What do you mean 100 years ago? What you're talking about is basic on an agreement of 100 years ago of Western music. I don't think so. I think it's a discovery. Because I want to talk about the results of the studies. It's my personal study in perception of tonal modulation, which is discovery of European tradition. It's a very sophisticated thing for music theories, and it's nothing but people with no music education. What I found that people from different countries from around the world, they listened to harmonic progressions that medulate to different degrees, and they perfectly recognize what is. There is no modulation, I'm not in many cultures and musical cultures. Yeah, but my point is that European tradition, it's not an agreement. It's a discovery that became accepted. But okay, that's great. It's European tradition. But we have other continents in the world that create music. And probably European tradition is based on all this music that has been done for 100,000 years ago. Let's say 50,000 years ago, today this is the conservative estimate that music exists at least for 50,000 years. So perfect. So then we have 15,000 years of music, of doing it, of sharing it. Of being in circles like this, we have to pay attention how music was performed. And for me this is the key. Because music was a part of the community performed probably always in circle for certain, certain, certain objecties to promote to the individual and to the community. So first of all, the music production and recording scene is 100 years ago. The stage in music for me is the most unnatural thing for music. Stage and people. Yeah, not alone. Glenn did not like to perform stage if he did not want to be seen when he was performed. Exactly. So I think you promoted a great question. What is music? I agree we have to speak the same language because if not we are lost in concepts. And for me music is not even a concept. We are trying to really describe something that has been existing before us. Sound has been before us and we just jump into these poles of life, of this vibrational field that then we as humans we start to pick up some elements from there and we just start creating music for what. For me the question is we do music for what? But the key is that we do music for 15,000 years ago till now. With years like with that with 30 years one tone, I can demonstrate here, you know, to really complex harmonies because the human existence evolve and the music evolve with it. But we cannot just explain music as the last 100 years ago. Because music is something that comes from human nature and I think really interesting what you are talking about is like what is about poles? What is this? There is no harmony here. There is no tonal progression. This is pole. This is rhythm. We can discuss if this is part of music or not. I think it is one of the elements of music. But what is true is that in many traditions ago, this is a board. They were doing music with elements with each community. What do we have? We have a stone. We start creating poles for what? Because maybe we have a pose. We can be together in a space and that will promote something in us. Maybe a sense of security. Maybe to dance because if we attend, each tradition has rhythm for what is the rhythm. I wonder if... I will go back to what you were talking about in terms of our pace, our walking, our steps and stuff. It is so interesting because it is something I have thought about before in terms of mathematics actually is that our experience in the world, as human beings, is based, how can I say this? Walking is very intrinsic to us. It is ordering time into these discrete steps. Whether they are uneven or uneven or whatever. If there is step 0, step 1, something might be like 10 steps away. We also have our breathing. That is this discrete unit-based activity, which is very different for instance than when you have a bird soaring through the sky from one tree to the next, which is not the same way to subdivide our entire experience of the world. Which to me connects to rhythm. But then I was also thinking about how maybe we can connect rhythm and pitch in terms of just multiplying, like multiplications of some event. Like if a fundamental tone is a certain frequency, how we find multiples of that, the over-tone series or mathematical ratios of that to be pleasing or displeasing, etc. The simple ratio is more pleasing, more stable, etc. There is something true also about rhythm. The rhythm you played, for instance, was very regular. It was based on some sort of unit that had these kind of like, you know, like a meter. It fell into a meter that changed. But it was still like this kind of grouping into some number of events. Or some number of elements or something. And I think that in both of these worlds, like, I think the evolutionary like clearly it's tapping into things that we relate to. And I think a lot of it comes from our need to understand where sound comes from and to understand the voice of your family, which is based on pitch. I mean, you need to know pitch. There are so many evolutionary reasons for us being attracted and understanding certain sound. I don't remember where I was going with that. I mean, that starts to finally get to the title of this conversation. The title of this conversation. Let's talk more about rhythm. I'd be very interested to know from both scientists and musicians about the mind in bodily action. I mean, because you're describing something about the movement of the body, is the sensory elements that you're receiving. And what about those aspects of your experience of music? Well, you know, I go back often to this quote by one of my favorite pianists. His name is Cecil Taylor. There was a film called Imagine the Sound that came out in the early 80s. And it opens with this line that's in an interview with Mr. Taylor. He says, well, to me, what music is is everything that you do. So he grounds it in it. Not everything you hear, but everything you do. So he grounds it in action. And of course, our actions are, you could say, constrained in the sense that there are only certain things that we can do with our bodies. Like there's only so fast you can walk. You know, we don't walk at 10 hertz. We walk closer to one or two hertz, right? You know, in terms of cycles per second, right? We don't breathe at 10 hertz. We breathe at one or less than half a hertz or more like a tenth of a hertz if you're meditating. So these kind of create these natural constraints on action, which are temporal. And then grouping those actions like you say in ways that are either regular or not, but that we can synchronize. Because, you know, I guess for me, if it's about everything that you do, who's the you? First of all, it's all of us, right? So it's everything that we do together as well, which means like our ability to synchronize our actions, which is so fundamental to music making and music listening is that, well, the fact that we can actually generate a pulse and then to have everybody clap that pulse together. For example, and then that we can sing in unison and these kinds of things. I saw this one paper, this scientific paper about, you know, there's a lot of speculative origins about music. Like, why are we even able to do this? And one idea was that if I clap by myself, it's only as loud as I can clap, but if we're able to clap in unison, then it's suddenly twice as loud, which means it reaches twice the distance, which is four times the area, which is four times as many people. So suddenly it's this massive communicative leap because we can do things together. You can reach more people and we can synchronize more. So that to me seems like it's so grounded in us doing things together that I don't see how we can talk about music without thinking about it in social terms. It's really interesting that we were talking about also about grouping. The pulse, which for me is eternal. The pulse is always there. We just can open to listen to the pulse, but we are pulse. I mean, our heart is pulsating, but also there is something pulsating. Then how we organize the pulse is the key for starting to talk about, which are the cycles because the pulse is eternal, but then depending on how we organize the pulse into cycles, then we're going to be able to breathe and walk. And through the breathe, then for me melody starts to happen. So for me this is like the key of music. It's like this pulse, that is eternal, that is always accessible, and if it's steady, we can just create anything. But then that cycle that we decide is going to generate the breath, and from the breath the melody. And that's it. So then when we all stomp together, you want to do guys like in the experiment, maybe doing something. So let's just do this. So this is just like an entrant like pulse, as it's always right there. So as he said, we just start, for example, doing... OK, now what is the cycle, right? So this is just, you see how fast we get into it without not even thinking about it. But then if we start adding the melody, just will be the way that we breathe. I like to understand that each country, the difference about music is different ways of breathing. It's different with breath, you know, and rhythms, each culture has a different rhythm, you know. But I believe that also there is like underneath the roots, it is a common rhythm and a common pulse that we can really all get together and really communicate. So maybe a better title for this would have been embodied cognition and embedded cognition in the sense that it's not only about the sensory motor of the individual, but the social connection that is not... And cognition is embedded also in the interaction. But it's a very interesting part of the social communication between humans that does not involve ideas. Actually, one thing music is miserable at doing, which I find remarkable, is communicating ideas. Stravinsky said music is incapable of communicating ideas. By ideas, I mean something not like feeling or emotion. For example, let's take an idea. Let's say child labor is abhorrent. I can write a poem, portray that no problem. I can write a painting, showing child labor somewhere in the hours of some factory in India, and make you revolt in your feeling of injustice. I can make it from movie, I can make it... But try to make a symphony that portrays the sentence, child labor is abhorrent. It's very hard. Let me ask you. And I find that spectacular. It points to the visceral power of music. What you are talking about... None of us mention ideas, by the way, which I think is natural. We don't think of music as a little paragraph in the New York Times. You can portray more ideas than all of Beethoven's non-sympany. Yet we all think they are incredibly powerful. But you said something using your voice in rhythm and with pitch. And you then said that that wasn't music. And so that involves you having drawn a line about this is outside of music. Me saying something is not music. So you are saying that speech is not music. And that to me is not so clear, a distinction. You are making a distinction about sonorous human action. I am using my early, very simplistic definition of music as sounds which interact with us. Of course, once you put speech in the middle of that line, this is why I started saying I really have no clue what music is. From the beginning, I diversed myself from any really good knowledge of the whole business, especially in front of musicians. But once you start putting speech and tonality, of course I am making, I am using these. But I am talking, can you imagine just using pure sounds? You can probably portray ideas, especially if it is a cultural context. But it is not the most efficient way of all forms, I think. That is one of the middle ground's most code. Which is using rhythm specifically to encode information. I think on a working level, I do agree that they are, I don't want to get too caught up in this part of the conversation. But I do think that there is sort of the absolute truth of what is music. And I cannot argue with the entirely open-endedness of that. But I do think that culturally in 2015 or whatever. On the Upper East Side. Probably there is a consensus about what music is. And written spoken word does not necessarily fall into that. At the very least, we can talk about music that includes language or something that specifically has identifiable meaning in music that doesn't. Maybe we could at least not say that that is the only kind of music. And at least for me as a composer, I am really not interested in communicable narrative through text and language. I am much more interested in abstract forms and stuff. So my music falls to the non-verbal side of things. And that is one of the reasons I think I can even do music at all is that I really don't have much to say for the narrative side of it. I think that is actually the definition of music. It is a non-representational way of communication. This is why we even cannot compare it with more of that. Because more of that still gives you letters. In music we have no recognizable images. We have no words to translate. We have nothing tangible. We just have a flow of sounds organized in tonal relationships. Or it is a rhythm. Because in using like in conventional music we are talking about two dimensions. Most importantly, it is time dimension, error of time, rhythm, meter and rhythm, and tonal relationships. And music can be without tonal relationships. And it could be very effective as nature demonstrates. You can use different rhythms to include people in different psychological states and produce different results. And it is really spectacular. Do you think that music can get away from any kind of metaphorical representation? When you have alterations in time, in space, or tone, it almost seems that it implies a certain metaphoric interpretation on some level. And that how can you really get away? It is not the same as using words, but one tone might be higher than the other. And this is going to create certain spatial metaphors in the arts. But it also maps onto something of again getting back to embodied cognition. It maps back onto bodily experience and experiences in time and space. Basically, this is what I tried to find in my studies when I measure people responses to different tonal tension, to different tonal distances. And the responses to different tonal distances were expressed in the sense of perceived tension, but also in the sense of perceived brightness and perceived warmth. Do you think, why do you never dance? I did not finish it. I did not finish. So basically, when we listen to music, when we perceive this world, we are either very comfortable and very relaxed. We can be frightened, we can be tense, and it is physical tension. So we can think about our life in general as a sequence of tension and release. It is a very simplified, terribly simplified explanation of music. That music captures this particular aspect of living. It basically gives us sequences of tension and release that somehow creates emotion. It creates our living. When we listen to music, we live through music. It is always in time. It is tightly controlled in time. We experience psychological state in time. It is developing through those tension and releases, through those synestatic reactions, warmth and brightness. Some music does something to us that makes us live in parallel. It is a sorcery. Like I told you, I was an applied philosopher. I looked into the V.A. Foundation of Music, and I am trying to give something tangible, some explanation. This is what I found with data. I think that again, Chairman, with him, I think this is cultural. What is once and what is called? If we do an experiment with tapping into different cultures, maybe we can agree on that. My perception, for example, for me is a cycle in seven, super stable. Nobody will say that. A cycle in five, for me, is really stable and also for the brain. But let me finish. So brightness, warmth, tension, harmony. Those concepts, I don't think that really even defined music. I do not. That's part of non-nolotic elements. This is very important. I am not talking about global music perception. I am talking about where it begins. Like a single cell doesn't define human organism, but we need to study human cell-how functions, in order to understand how the organism functions. As far as cultural constructs, yes, music is cultural construct. But the same study, the replica of it, of my study was drawn in India with people who never had this experience of moving on different tonal distances, modulations. The results were the same. I am talking about subconscious precognitive perception. Yes, there is European traditions, there are different traditions, but the studies show again and again that people capture the heart of musical message. Even this musical message comes from different cultures. Music is the universal language. All other languages, if I start talking in French or Russian, only a few people would understand me. Like the music falls into that category too. I think there is a lot, probably most of the kinds of music in the world, are not necessarily music to everybody at first listen. I, for one, listen to a lot of noise music that is built specifically on a richness of harmonic overtone and spectrum that wouldn't collapse nicely into the clean ratios at all. Do you mean the folk music or inventing music? I guess I am coming at it from noise music, particularly in electronic sound. Oh, I think only about folk music. Only about living traditions, something which was developed by people through real musical practice, not invention. What happens in music, and this is really fascinating, yes, there are all these experimentations. And the limitations are wonderful because they give impetus for development of new expressive means. But there is also such things as craftsmanship. If you look into the creations of Jürgen Sivacinbach, even his sons called him Oldwig, like in an old-fashioned. But if you look carefully in his compositions, you would find political analogy, you would find a whole tone scale, you would find some amazing thing which we already see it in and developed as avant-garde. It's very much for avant-garde experimentation because this is what gives new life to music. What do you think about the inherent problem in pitch between pure intonation, like just intonation and equal temperament? It's a fantastic theme. I remember I was torturing. There are two approaches to tuning, the sort of natural one, which maybe we often sing in, which is frequencies being clean, multiples and ratios of frequency to one another. But then in western music in particular, for instance, with the invention of the piano, I don't know my music history so well, but equal temperament is a way of sort of pushing this clean mathematical representation of pitch into something that is more regular, and that can be, for instance, transposed and you've got this idea of keys and stuff like that. But it mostly lines up and doesn't quite line up. It's a fantastic theme. Let me give some foundation for that. I don't know if you were finished with your remark. There's this inherent divide between them. You can either go one way towards this sort of pure world of sound, which happens to actually be what we natively sing in. There are so many things to say about it. I'm not sure where to start exactly, but it's always built off of a fundamental frequency, which is kind of like your unit of time, whereas in equal temperament, which is, for instance, where the piano example came from, everything is slightly out of tune, so to make it work. And they're pretty close. So it mostly works. But there is kind of like this fundamental problem. I actually want to change the... I just want to shift a little bit. You think we're clean forward and just one minute. We can always get back to it during the question and answer period. We haven't had a chance to hear a little bit more about your acoustical research, and I thought it was a very important dimension to bring in to... My parochial interest. But I think there is a... Despite the chatter, so to speak, there is a common... I think we can all agree that this is a whole spectrum from all the way from very culturally conditioned perception of sound that we call music, who can change across time, as you said, across cultures. But there's also some, I think also... I think what you're saying has... I agree with a good part of it. There's some fundamental built-in perception of music that has to do with our evolution most likely. So the whole spectrum. I don't find that shocking at all. I do think they are taken out of context. Many music can be born. It can really... If you take popular music of one culture, put it in another, even today, despite the internet, it can elicit at least boredom, if not revolt, in some cases. So that's definitely... I don't see anything shocking, but I also added the fact that it's not particularly good communicating ideas. That doesn't mean it cannot communicate ideas. Stravinsky went to extremes that it can't. It's incapable. So it all thinks the best way, if you want to write an op-ed to write it in a sonata form, it's better. So I think we all, despite... I think we're all covering different same ground at the end. But I'd like to ask another question, maybe change the perception of the discussion a little bit, in your own realm as musicians. What you find lacking in terms of tools, so to speak, not tools I'm talking about, but what is it that you would like to be able to do that you can do now? Is there anything you reach? Of course, you're all accomplished musicians, and actually this morning I said in bed and listened to all of you, and it was remarkable. The variety in tremendous spectrum. As musicians, do you feel that there is an exploratory part of what you do, aside from performance, that you're reaching for something that hasn't been done, or you want to do, if it is so, what is it? Well, I can say as an improviser, that we're always... You know, kind of make it our business to reach for the unknown. I mean, that's like the name of the game. You know, or in other words, what really transforms and what really communicates is, in that moment, in the improvisative moment, that somebody, or a group of people, on the edge of what they know, on the edge of what their masters at, where you find it maybe almost breaking apart to this space where you're not even sure if it's music anymore, where you're right on that boundary. And that, to me, that vulnerable place is the most rewarding aspect of music. I mean, I experienced it last night. I really didn't know what was happening, but I knew that we were all experiencing it together. I mean, everybody in the room. And that is, to me... So I guess I'm not really saying like, what don't I have, because I am very fortunate to get to say I had that experience last night. Well, actually, it answers you, what you are reaching for. So you're reaching that moment in the improvisation where you are almost untethered from everything you've heard before, and you're experiencing something new. Well, yeah, I mean... For me, it's terrifying to be pianist like you. I mean, for me, if I was a pianist, like you were sitting on piano, I'm thinking of Thironya Smunk. I'm thinking of, you know, every great jazz pianist before me, and I'll be terrified that, when am I going to go from there? Except every good musician's performance without this fear. And you said you do so by pushing yourself to an edge, and I'm trying to get a feeling to what that edge is about. So what happens there when you get to that point? You know, the thing is that we've all been there. I mean, we're all improvisers. I mean, in the same way that we can debate until the cows come home, if they ever do. I don't know if people stay there anymore, but what music is, we can also have a similar conversation about what improvisation is. And the more you examine that concept, it also kind of melts away in the sense that, well, everything we do is improvised, except the things that aren't. And that stuff we know, like, well, they all did the same thing at the same time, so they probably weren't improvising. Like, they must have... How did they know how to do that? You know, but even that is an illusion that can be, you know, like dancers use this... They do this... There's an improvisational dance technique called flocking, where, you know, if you just follow the person in front of you, and I started doing this, then we all started doing this, and suddenly it looks choreographed, you know? So that kind of thing of like the fact that we can, just in the spur of the moment, do something in sync or in unison. It's in a residence. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, you know, so another... What I was going to say is that improvisation is something we're born doing in the sense that we're... You know, it's how we explore the world. It's how we come to learn about our environments. It's how we learn to do everything. It's how we learn to talk, how we learn to eat. You know, I mean, very... How we're willing to walk is by a lot of stumbling around and eventually finding a path, you know? And that's really, to me, we're always doing that. So that's a very primal experience. And so experiencing that in the course of performance, where, you know, you develop all this mastery at these different instruments and stuff, but then you also take yourself to this point where... This... The sort of ideas side or the kind of intellectual side or the deliberate side of you, like the stuff that... The part of you that plans what to do next and when to do it and how to do it, that seems to become relaxed. It's almost like being drunk, actually, when you just make a lot of bad decisions. But it's sort of like having no... Well, Charles Lim, you guys may know about his work. You did MRI's... FMRI's of people improvising, which is a very strange thing. I mean, they were lying down on their backs with a keyboard strapped to them. And he had one control condition where they played a memorized piece, another control... Another condition, the test trial where they were asked to improvise on a blues or something like that, on a keyboard. So then he found that certain cognitive functions are relaxed, like the self-guiding kind of... The self-consciousness is basically relaxed, and then you find yourself just acting. So when there's a sort of unity of thought and action, I guess that's sort of the thing that, to me, is kind of like... I guess it's also been described as a flow state and that kind of thing. I wonder if that pursuit of that moment in improvisation, that sort of threshold, to me I see that as the pursuit of the live experience. Like the total live-ness, like being in the moment where the future is in the future and the past is in the past, and you're sort of like right there between them. And I 100% agree with you in the improvisational context, but I think that that actually is part of all of our experience, even if we're playing a piece of music that we've rehearsed a thousand times. Like there's still no certainty that the next moment will be what was planned or will be something different. And that is a fundamental bit of difference between the live experience and the recorded experience. And going back to the word body in the title, I think that the sort of live experience is the presence of our body in this space, listening to someone play music and not necessarily knowing what's next, which is so fundamentally different than listening to a recording. And it's true your CD player might die the next moment, or things might interrupt the listening experience, but the expectation, the sort of like state of listening to a recording is one of listening to something that's already been like set in a record, in a recorded form, in like a archived form. And that doesn't afford this uncertainty. Still an pleasure. Of course. I recently found on YouTube a little solo of Johnny Hodges playing all of me. And I played it 25 times in a row. And then I found somebody who plays you that I am on YouTube who actually reproduced the solo on guitar, not per note. The sound of Baku's sound was exactly the same. So even something... I think I know her. You know... I think it's a he or she. I think... I think... Jack of Turban is the name of the guitar. But the point is, even something as ossified or as frozen as a recording done in 1934, 1954 in Switzerland, which was the case, can be in quite a source of pleasure. But I'm curious to ask you this question. On the other end of improvisation, which is when something is superscripted, even to the point of taking the human out. Now John Cage tried exactly to do that. He took the I chain and tried to take the human completely out. And even the duration of the notes, the picture of the notes, everything was prescribed by dice. And he obtained a composition. Of course, when you play it, you have all these uncertainties that you're talking about. But how can you then explain, should the opposite end of the spectrum from Euro improvisation? That's really interesting. How do you explain the musicality of such a thing? As a musician. Because there is an intention. Before doing it, there is an intention of why I'm doing this. And where is my internal setting? And that's going to affect completely the music, but most of all the tone and the resonance of what I'm doing. So sometimes you can have the tone, and we have the same tone or the same solo. But what is going to make that experience be in difference for you that I listen to, and for me that I'm playing that, the intention of the player. That's going to shift everything. So it doesn't matter if it's improvisation, or if it's like abstract music. What is this? For me, sound is a container. Music is a container. A bakeable. So you put your intention there, and then sound struggle, and it's going to hit you. And what is going to hit you is not even the sound. It's going to hit you the intention, which is information. So maybe it does a language you were referring before. Well, information is not ideas. Ideas are emotions. Yeah, I mean, a lot of contemporary composition and I guess people who call them. I mean, I'm also a composer, so I'll put myself in this category. But people who call themselves composers, you know, they're in the business of scripting action. For musicians, performers to then perform and become the vessel for the composer's intention, or will, or something like that. But what I find is, so a friend of mine, Steve Schick, the first time I met him was about 20 years ago. He was performing this piece called Bone Alphabet. Do you know this piece by Vinko Global Car? It's like what you were talking about, but it's worse. In the sense that it's extremely intricate polyrhythms, you know, 7 over 11 over 13, stuff like that. Every bar is different. He said he had to learn one measure a day for about five weeks. That was all he did, was put himself through his thing. And it was like, in the end, though, when I saw him perform it, it wasn't about the composer. It was actually about him. It's sort of like you're saying, in the sense that he so fully embodied this piece to the point that he owned it. I mean, it was his. And the way he described it was that when he is really popping, when it's really popping, when it's really together, there's this flow that he described as like yoga, which is, and what yoga means is, I mean, the word literally means yoke, in that sense of tie together, and it means tying together the mind and the body. That's basically what the meaning of that is. So basically what he meant is that he feels connected, you know. This is really about the body. This is really interesting because I know all the title of the discussion about embodied conviction. So what I want to, what is lacking or what I want is to be united with yoga. That's the meaning of yoga, to be united in body and mind. I mean, experience of as a performer is like how I can achieve my best performance, and also in sync, and jumping to the unknown with certainty that I'm going to be safe, is relying on the body. It's really, really, is really getting out of my mind of what should be played now, what is the next part, how this should sound. It's like my intention is to jump and to jump with you and meet you there, and I don't know what is going to happen, but you know what happens when the performers, even in a composition, we create from that place the audience jump with you, because they really experience that it's a jump, jumping into the unknown, and when that synchronicity happens with the members of the ensemble, it's this amazing feeling of unison and unity with something else that aligns your body and your mind and aligns the body and the mind of all the performance. And what happens next for me is the important thing, because what I want to achieve is after that moment is silence. So what I want to promote, you know with the music, is silence, because silence is stillness. After all this movement that sound and music has provoking you, for you to organize and change. In your molecular level, your psychology, but just silence is that space when we can really finally be different and reinvented and created again. And on that note, we're going to open things up to the audience members. I would encourage you to state your name and please put your comments in the form of a question for the participants. You can line up and use the microphone there. Don't be shy. Thank you so much for your comments. And finally, you're reading here and there that music fundamentally is emotion experienced and expressed in a different way, a safe way. When you hear that, I'm wondering how you respond and people like Alice Miller, the gift of child for your own good, she said emotion attaches meaning to experience. You can't take anything you've learned, studied or read. And music on two levels, I would like to say real fast, orpheus, when he played his lute 2500 years ago, Prometheus stopped having his livid torn out, Tandalus got out of the river and stopped with the low-hanging fruit and sisyphus. His stone and all the spirits and Hades just stopped their torment and torture. Then we also have a career to be hearing it, how many thousands of young people have died hearing the drum and the trumpets in military expressions for thousands of years? So this whole thing about emotion being expressed safely through music, but very little understanding. And in India, they say resonance produces light. We live in it, I would just love to hear any of your reactions to the connection between emotion, learning and music. Thank you. You know, there's a French economist named Jacques Atali, did you ever read his book Noise? It's from the 70s, it's called Noise, the Political Economy of Music. It's really a landmark book. And he talks about the history of western music, but as an economist. So it's actually about more social questions, basically, about why this sort of thing might have come about. And one thing he said was that in the beginning, when society started to organize in ways that had music, that represented a ritual of control to combat the prevailing sense of chaos in the world around us. You know, the sense of complete unpredictability. Here's a way where we can control ourselves, control each other, and work together, do something that is organized. It may have been the first organized thing that humans ever did. And it's a way of staving off that basically the fear of the unknown, the fear of death, the fear of predators, or the fear of whatever might befall us in the next moment. So it becomes this ritual of safety. Yeah, I think especially the fear of unknown, because historically, with international religion, but historically until now, to a large extent, music was enshrined in religion. The secular aspect of music was a minority, so to speak, was a relative rarity. So the fear of the unknown, which is, to my opinion, as a non-religious person who respects religion, is central to religion. And I think in that same vein, I explain the centrality of music as an experience. It's a spiritual way of dealing with the unknown. And this is the best way to express religion, which is thought one of the best. And it's a central way of expressing religion, which is thought has been through music. Yeah, and emotional component of music. Both speech and music came from vocal production. When we talk, we always give emotional color. If we start talking about emotional input, the speech would become very boring, mechanistic. So at some point in human evolution, the first signaling system, the expression of pleasure, of pride, beforcated on symbolic representation, language, and music, then a large component of the first signaling system became used for emotional expressiveness. Yeah, and in the model of triune brain by Paul McLean, which was developed by Yac Banks-Seb. The first layer is our reflexive reactions to the world. The next layer is our emotional understanding of our reactions to the world. And next level is thinking about thought. And it's clear today that there is no clinically healthy thinking without emotional impact. So this is what music carries on, it's emotional communication. And it does it in a very simple way, available for everybody, but still is able to deliver stunningly complex messages. I'm also saying this difference between life and death. There is always, I think, we see rituals around the world, there's always music. And why? Because music supports that process in funerals. In, for example, in India, in the nursing homes, during the process of dying, you're going to be surprised. Because about culture, which kind of music they put for when people are dying, they are not using harp melodies. There are a lot of percussive sound, really intense. Do you maybe believe that? Here, because we will see that emotionally we want this kind of harp and yalic sounds. They use a lot of percussion, maybe because rhythm carries, they believe that rhythm carries the soul and can go there. And also, you know what? Being in Mexico also in some rituals and funerary rituals, when music is not just for the soul that is traveling, it's also for the family that is around to be able to handle pain, music, we can rely on that structure that is provided through rhythm, basically, and sometimes through melody, to really release and balance our emotions. And of course, if we go around the world, all the prayers, which is to connect to the unknown, to really communicate, are based with melodies. As always, always just the voice praying, you know. So for me, it's really, really important that we just, why would Luke, a little bit back, look for traditions and rituals and see how they've been using music? Because it's really basic. Melodies, for me, has been the prayers, how the internal being, the psychology of the spirit, communicates with the transcendental and rhythm promotes dance, and dance of the community. And that's how with that tools, we can really balance our emotions and go through daily life, being able to go through the challenges because there are challenges. And now in our ages, for me, sometimes tension is really good. Because tension matches the tension of the soul. So if I'm tense, I don't want to listen really like music. I want, I love to listen a lot of jazz, I want to compose a lot of tension. Because that is going to match my emotion. And you know what music does? When you match that emotion without judgment, and you are with that, naturally, with that tension, what music does is going to come to a flow to a new balance, which maybe is released. But sometimes balance is tension. Well, these ideas are also very consonant with the experience of the infant in the kind of call response with the mother's voice, that the mother's rhythmic touching, and the intonations of the mother's voice also helps control, organize, and provide a sense of safety for the infant to organize the infant's in co-ate experiences. So it's all very, I think, resonant with the earliest experiences of the individual. Any question? I'm Christine Hetiparas. I'm an English PhD student at CUNY. And thank you so much for this amazing talk. And in the interest of call and response, I'm really interested in music as a conversation. And when you had mentioned silence, I'm really excited because I'm interested in this idea of regulation of breath and how in a conversation there's this desire or intention for a response. And this like holding a breath to listen to the other side, and this difference between listening and hearing and spirit and breath have an etymological history. And I was wondering if you could talk, since you were talking about time, how spirituality, transcendentalism, religion affects music. For example, the difference between someone who believes in an afterlife and someone who doesn't, whose time operates differently. If time is a construct, and music is social or socially constituted, then how does our perception of time affect music? I mean, it really does really just, Christine, is like when we create a cycle of measure, that is going to affect completely the breath. So that is going to completely affect you the experience of the music. So for example, if I have a pulse, I used to compose rhythm with my fingers. So it's really different if I count in five, one, two, three, four, five, one, two, three, four, five, one, two, three, four. I'm creating a cycle, and you start breathing with me, but if I do six, one, two, three, four, five, six. You see that is completely different, and everything relates in how I'm with cycle I'm creating, and that is going to completely guide you into a breath, and that breath into melody, or harmonic rhythm if you are creating church. Does that make sense? I guess I'm going to, in my experience in performance, playing in rooms full of people, where we can all hear each other, and in particular we can hear each other breathing. I mean as we actually can hear, if we really listen, and you know what I've found is my best sense of whether, you know, I make it as a performer, my job to make sure I somehow reach everybody in the room, you know. And if I don't do that, I can tell, like I can tell when that's not happening, and I can hear it, you know. And there are moments that I've experienced where you actually hear everybody breathe together, like really everybody takes a breath for the same moment, because music brought them to that. Because it's somehow, it's helping us synchronize our internal actions to that point, you know. So that to me is, I mean, when we talk about spirituality, it seems like we're starting from experiences like that, like this sort of sense of the stealth kind of expanding the encompass others. You know, and suddenly we have this awareness of non-singularity, and that to me is, anyway, that's how I'll answer you. I think that time, and I'm not sure I'm going to put this all together, but time and spirituality are related in the sense of either being contained or being open-ended. And that is maybe grounded in our experience or grounded outside of our experience, and I work a lot with electronics in my music, and I program these very basic microchips to synthesize sound, and they play alongside an ensemble. And so there's a communication thing there, but in one piece of mine, I have the music eventually settle into a chord, and it's sort of a musical event. You get to this chord that's slower and slower. And then that chord is programmed to play forever. Of course, things like the battery run out, or maybe, you know, it gets destroyed or something. Or, you know, laws of entropy prevent it from playing forever. But nonetheless, the gesture is towards infinity. And that's, I think, more like a mathematical gesture, and I think I'm bringing in maybe too many ideas here, but computation is sort of this embodiment of mathematics. It's sort of like mathematics in the real world. And through computation, or even a simple instruction like, play this note forever, you kind of gesture towards the infinite. Whether or not you can actually attain it. And I think that that gesture is a gesture towards something larger than us. In fact, it's a gesture towards something larger than the universe, probably, we don't know. And to me, that's maybe as close as it comes. You're pointing out the metaphorical power of music, which I think we haven't touched on. You mentioned something about silence. In some music traditions, silence is very important. In some other, for example, in Arabic and traditional, Arabic music, traditional Japanese music, silence can be integral part of a piece. While in Gaelic music, if you listen to Scottish Batpipes, there's a drone going on all the time. It's never going to stop. I'll show you that there's a flow. Both operate metaphorical, I think, arrows, so to speak. The point to breath, maybe to salvation, to security. And the operator may be on a very mechanistic level, but we find him very aesthetically pleasing. If you listen to a drone going on, the same thing with the continuum in Baroque music, it has a function of giving you sustenance. While note that stops can give you, you know, eerie feeling. If you go to Krakow, there is a bell tower, and every one hour there's a trumpet that plays. It plays this haunting, beautiful trumpet theme, and suddenly stops. Every hour of the day, forever. Since the guy who played it was one time during the invasion at some point in the 14th century, I think, of Poland, he was shot by an arrow in the middle of his tone. So to commemorate that act, there is that tone every day for one hour. And it doesn't matter how many times you hear it, the sudden stop of that tone invokes loss. So the metaphorical arrow towards loss that plays on a fundamental level, I think, is a very powerful part of music. Ian, I'm going to give you the last question. And before you get to it, I'm going to ask, maybe not show, there are some things you haven't used yet, but we'll do that after the question. I thought it would be a nice way to end the roundtable to maybe invoke a kind of communal experience with... Ian Buckingham. Maybe appropriate in this setting to recall that Sigmund Freud was famously non-musical. And this is attributed to various things, including particularly perhaps that he couldn't stand the sound of his younger sister practicing on the piano. What I think this may illustrate for us is that music, obviously, is culturally determined, but also psychologically determined, determined by individual and group psychology. And I think perhaps it ties in with what a number of speakers have said, that crucial aspect of music is conveying of meaning by sound, has to do with meaning. So I'd be interested in the views of the panel on that. It seems that the music is the most effective instrument of transfer of their complex information in a very simple way, because of the main morphological principle, perceived tension, and it's so primitive, so simple. This is how music reaches children with autism, people with very bad Alzheimer, basically gives them some kind of sanity for a period of time, helps somehow people with Parkinson to restore coordinated movement for a while, and somehow also music helps to restore speech and people with broken zafasia, the melodic and tenetian therapy. It's a very strange way of communication, very powerful, that's true. And it also seems a very powerful way of prophylaxis for the brain, cognitive prophylaxis. We know that children who are trained in music, they gain a few IQ points. They basically relate to short-term memory, which shows on verbal, on verbal, on numbers recall, but now recent studies show that music training helps people in their 60s, 70s, even 80s, even if people start musical training in you at the material age. Starting musical instrument gives them cognitive advantage, creates age-compensatory mechanisms. And it happens most likely because of multi-sensory integration. When people look into notation and find, write notes, and listen and predict melodic future, it activates different parts of the brain. And this multi-sensory integration basically helps brain to stay in better cognitive health for longer time. I'll take this opportunity being in a house of psychoanalysis to an apropos of Freud to suggest that embodied cognitive science is really rediscovering and expanding Freud's initial insights. And when he said that the first ego is the body ego, that as analysts, we're always listening for the metaphorical representations of the body in earliest experience and how this maps emotional connections to objects. Yes, and you see the respond to music. It's not intellectual response. We also can have intellectual response. For example, if you listen to some incredible, some fugue by Bach, and if you know it very well, you can follow each voice and enjoy melodic transformation. But in general, what music gives us, it's visceral pleasure. And music affects our breathing, our heartbeat, our hormonal system, electroconductivity of skin, gives us pill reaction, the shivers. So it affects us so directly. And it gives us the sense of living through life again. And it stays the way. So natural for something else to demonstrate. I have to create some sound with you. We're talking about two hours. I really thank you for giving me the opportunity. Oh, but may I just say, natural gifts tonight are the concept. Wow, it's just like a little flamenco show up with this. Yeah. So I want to just have a little experience. Why? I want to welcome you. If you want, you want to close your eyes and just put your hands like that. Exactly. And just try just to perceive with your hands. Music My own, my own, my own, my own. Oh Oh Oh Oh Oh You studying the democratic Absolutating today. Thank you all. Thank you everybody. I hope we needed something to bring us all together. I am not a cook anyway, any of you want toali, or is that ahtarang maker?