 Thanks for coming. We've got a good crowd tonight and we'd like to welcome you to the second annual heavy metal variety show. We're going to have a lot of fun tonight and we're especially glad to be here at the Helix Center and the New York Psychoanalytic Institute. Before we start I want to thank Ed who runs the Helix Center for putting this together and all the people involved, Sharon Weller and others who helped make all this happen. There was a lot of logistical details and Miguel and the sound crew because this is not obviously a sound room so we're very pleased with what they've been able to put together and we hope you'll enjoy the show. We're going to be doing some songs about mind and brain and mental disorders and talking a little bit about it. We want to start with a kind of big question. Who are you or what are you? Are you a body, a mind, a soul, all of the above, none of the above? Everybody has a different opinion about this but it's a pretty ancient question. The oracle of Delphi told Socrates, know thyself and you know this was a kind of deep thing because he also told Socrates he was the wisest man on earth. So some two millennia later, a fellow named Renee had a different idea. He said well dude I already know this stuff right? Not only do I know myself that's the only thing I can know. All I know is what's in my head. So with his famous Kajito Ergo Sum he became the godfather of consciousness. This of course is Renee Descartes and he's the grand poopov of consciousness and tonight we're going to celebrate Renee by starting out with a song in his honor. The first two songs will be about mind and brain and consciousness in particular and the first song is called Inside of Me and it's a direct tribute to Renee Descartes. Okay let's try it now. I think so I am. I feel so I must be. Sometimes I don't know. It used to be me. I see your eyes. They're staring at me. They're sharp as knives. What do they say? Inside of me. My soul has passion. It's trying to feel. Searching for desire. Nothing is real. My will is weak. Not very free. Nothing to get hung about. Well that's just the deal. It can't seem. It can't seem. Inside of me. Inside of me. That's the way. For me I can be. You can't see. Inside of me. Inside of me. That's the way. Oh me I can be. I think so I am. I feel so I must be. Sometimes I don't know. It used to be me. I think so I am. I feel so I must be. I sometimes I don't know. It used to be me. You can't see. Inside of me. Inside of me. That's the way. For me I can be. On me I can be. On me I can be. On me I can be. On me I can be. I can be. All right, thank you. So now we're going to move to another mind song, consciousness song. This one's about that eternal struggle between mind and matter, specifically about that. And it's called Mind Over Matter. Mind over matter. Something I'm trying to do. I guess it's only physics. It keeps me apart from you. Mind over matter. Something I'm trying to do. Break down space and time. We need to gather with you. I'm trying to will you hear. Find you wherever you are. Locate your body or soul. Pull you in from afar. Are you still in my time? Have you ever been in a dream? Have you slipped away? Have you gone forward tonight, within an ocean? Let me know. We're aware, my journey. Different path to another on the sea In the air, light and free, In a place, Light and late, Wherever you are now, Is my much fun, No amount of space or time Keep you from being light, I'm trying to do, I guess it's only this is, Keep me apart from you, Find a matter, something I'm trying to do, I guess it's only this is, Keep me apart from you, Find a matter, something I'm trying to do, Break down space and time, Be together with you, Be together with you, Be together with time, Be together with you. All right, thank you. Well, okay, so we talked about consciousness, We know it's important, But don't you think it's a little overrated sometimes? I mean, you know, how many times have you sort of been in a fight with, You know, like your spouse and, you know, Your conscious mind is in there and says to you, Well, damn, why did I say that? You know, I got to, I got to stick to it now, It's too late to backtrack, I got to kind of stick to that thing. And the thoughts are coming out and then you're kind of consciously watching it and saying, Oh, now I'm in trouble. My old mentor, Mike Gizanica, Used to talk about this as saying, you know, Consciousness is the story we tell ourselves About what's really going on in our brain. And you know, the Oracle knew this, But he sort of needed to school Socrates, Because Socrates didn't realize he was the wisest man on earth. And so, you know, he said, you know, if you want, the Oracle said, If you want to know the truth, you just got to look inside. But Socrates was stubborn. He said, Hey, man, you know, I know, I know bup this. I just don't know this stuff. What do you mean? I'm the wisest man on earth. I just have to look inside. And the Oracle said, Hey, I didn't say it was going to be easy. You got to get in there and dig deep to find out what's going on in there. So, you know, this takes us to two songs about digging deep into the unconscious. But before we do that, Tyler's going to do a short reading on something that is relevant. Yes. So I told Joe I find something from, this is from the katha Upanishad. And I just want to say a few words after I read it. Thus develop, this is a advice to everybody. Thus develop a super conscious way of knowing. Meditation enables you to go deeper and deeper into consciousness from the world of words to the world of thoughts than beyond thoughts to wisdom in the self. So what I take from that is that when you go beyond the stream, sort of typical stream of consciousness, there can become a super consciousness because the stream of consciousness itself is a certain unconscious aspect to it. We think it's conscious, but in many ways when you start meditating, you see that there's a lot of automaticity to the mind. So that brings us to the song, the automatic mind. This is a song by Tyler. Welcome to the automatic mind. Door is open to remember time. If the chis are conjured like a dream, guiding actions of the waking screen. Even though I realize that still I'm disowned by as I contemplate the automatic mind. We live in the automatic mind. Introspection opens in our eyes. We seem advanced yet hardly in control. Even though I realize that still I'm as ill as I think about and can't live without the automatic mind. Watch, watch, top black drink, think, you think, you think, you think you think you think you think you think you think you think you think you think you think you think you think you think you think how much you think you think you think. So I you know when many you probably know this but when Freud visited the U.S., one of the main people that he visited with was Abraham Brill who was one of Freud's American devotees and disciples and one of the founders of the New York Psycho-Atlantic Institute. So when here being in this room and thinking about the unconscious mind, you know as a neuroscientist I think of the unconscious in terms of how the brain works and especially in terms of memory. So you know you've probably heard that there are different kinds of memory. For example there's explicit memory which is memory you can consciously retrieve at will. It's in your brain. It's stored in a part of the brain called the hippocampus. You want to remember what you had for breakfast. You can reach down in there and out comes the memory or maybe you remember a birthday. Hi Christina. All the way in the back. So you can remember these conscious things and Christina out bringing is about to come in as an expert on these kinds of memories. You can dig in and pull this stuff out. What you do is you retrieve those memories from explicit memory, explicit long-term memory. Put them into something called working memory which involves the prefrontal cortex. I think that's really what Freud had in mind when he talked about the preconscious. Memories that are available to be retrieved but aren't being retrieved right now. But more interesting is the true unconscious, the dynamic unconscious. How can we understand that in terms of the brain? Well, that's a more complicated thing but a lot of what may be thought of as repressed memories may not quite be like that. So we know that for example certain kinds of very stressful situations will release certain hormones like glucocorticoids and these will be released from the adrenal gland, go into the brain, go to our friend the hippocampus and shut it down. That takes about an hour to do the full thing. So during that hour you might have some memories that will be kind of fragmentally or incompletely farmed and could still be in there but you won't have the full blown memory. So in a situation like that under severe trauma you might have an amnesia for the event not because you necessarily repressed it which may happen but I'm not going to talk about that. But because of the effects of purely the mechanical effects of the stress hormones on the hippocampus preventing it from forming a fully blown memory. Now the patient may then go to therapy and try to retrieve those memories and in the process may be able to dig out those features and fragments and put together some kind of memory and that may be enough but on the other hand that opens up the possibility of a lot of false memories. So we just have to be aware that there are situations where memories can be unavailable, things that were conscious at the time but become unavailable because of these mechanical effects of stress hormones and that can maybe account biologically for some of what has been called repression. That's not to say repression does not exist I would not say that but it's not something we understand from the point of view of the brain. So now we're going to do a little tune about another aspect of the unconscious. You can't always trust what you think you know. You think you have something in your mind and you understand it you're so sure about it but then your mind deceives you. Things that are in our mind's eye aren't necessarily accurate. They're just in our mind's eye which is the name of the next song. If you look into my mind's eye you would see the way that I cried deep inside in my mind's eye we had love it was good. You were there if you understood. So I am excited for a little boulder and he can cover it though you could scream that changed but by the way we've had love. I'm here to show you how it's going to change In my mind's eye you were mine In my mind's eye If you look into my mind's eye You would see the way that I cry Even inside In my mind's eye You can't always trust what you think you know You can't trust what you think Sometimes your mind just puts on the show It's simply disease In my mind's eye you were mine In my mind's eye was blind In my mind's eye was blind In my mind's eye was blind In my mind's eye was blind Okay, thank you You know the Greeks had a dramatic device known as the Deus Ex Machina This was a thing where the just when the drama got at its worst where it seemed that the mortals couldn't figure a way out a god would descend from above and solve the problem So a long time later a philosopher named Gilbert Ryle sort of riffed on this idea and talked about consciousness as the ghost in the machine A bit later the cognitive science comes along and tries to understand the way the ghost the machine underlying the ghost is working and especially in the field of cognitive neuroscience we're trying to work out the way that machine does its thing Alright now we're gonna do one another one about the mind and going deep inside and this one is called map of your mind It's about how you know two people get together and you're trying to figure the other one out and look inside what's in the other's mind and try to find the way to work it all out and to be together So this one's from our wife Nancy Alright Got the winds of force Got the heat of your heart Keep me from the cold Got the currents of will Take me to your soul I'm on a journey that I knew I'd made It's a trip that I had to take and the excursion of need and design It's a voice You'll buy a fire Made a map of your mind I've shorted my course on sailing deep inside I've got the winds of force Got the heat of your heart Keep me from the cold Got the currents of will Take me to your soul I'm just loving that My sails will be true And they'll take me straight to you That the winds of strong but sweet So when I land on my side my roomy Got the heat of your heart Keep me from the cold Got the currents of will Take me to your soul Made a map of your mind Take me to your soul Made a map of your mind Take me to your soul To your soul To your soul To your soul Okay, thank you very much Okay, now we're going to do another one about memory and this is about how hormones help sort of glue your memories together It's called, in fact, glute I'll have some crackling sounds there Okay, time? So here we go with glue I saw you leaving, you saw me too Smile at me, that's what you do Tried to follow, but you were gone Now you wait to know I'm alone I can't think about your smile and eyes I can't believe your words were lies You make me happy, so very quiet I can't forget those times we're had There must be something in my brain There must be something in my veins There must be some primal glue That needs my memory stuck on you And I saw you go, I didn't know I thought you'd be back in a week or so It's so hard realizing that I wasn't really where you're at I dream about you most every night I dream you back Everything's alright I keep my dreams so come true I'll wake up right next to you There must be something in my brain There must be something in my veins There must be some primal glue That needs my memory stuck on you And I saw you go, I didn't know I thought you'd be back in a week or so There must be something in my brain There must be something in my veins There must be some primal glue That needs my memory stuck on you That needs my memory stuck on you That needs my memory stuck on you Okay And now we get to the part of the evening That Mark was talking about, the fear part Now fear is something that some of us up here work on, Yella and John and Moss Now I just live in fear It works on the environment, that's a kind of fearful talk So the first one we're going to do, fear is called When the Night is Dark When I was a kid I used to really like vampire movies This song was written about vampires, before vampires It was really cool and stuff, so I'm not like riding the bandwagon So here we go, when the night is dark When the night is dark I lose my fear When the night is dark I never shed a tear When the day light comes, scares me away When the day light comes, when I have to fake When the night is dark, I feel so free When the night is dark, night is dark I feel at peace, then the day light comes Scares me away, scares me away When the day light comes, when I have to fake When the night is dark When the night is dark, night is dark I begin to thrive, then the day light comes Scares me away, scares me away When the day light comes, when I have to fake When the day light comes, when I have to fake When the day light comes, when I have to fake Alright, thank you Thank you It's getting late, so we don't want to keep you too long So drop one song at least and go on to a song I wrote called Memory Pill This is moving into the topic, sort of the last I wrote a song called Memory Pill It's about some work that some of us here Daniela worked on, John worked on it too I think Daniela will tell us a little bit about how that works No, no, no, no Remember how in 2004 there was this movie Turn out a sunshine of the spotless mind It was a great idea, you want to get rid of a memory You go to the doctor, zap it, go on So it turns out it was actually based on a true study That happened in Joe's lab in 2000 Joe's student, Karim Nader What he found is that actually you don't have to target the memory Just as it formed, you can actually target old memory So whenever you reactivate a memory, it's unstable in your brain It's a good opportunity to block it So he did this experiment in reds and the reds kind of remembered the fear And he gave them a drug, a pill, not a pill, actually, an injection And the memory was gone, so another question is can you do it in humans? Can you remember something, get a pill, and your memory will be gone? Well, we don't know yet, but that's what we think, how memory works There's a twist though, we can use pills to erase memories when we want to get rid of them Especially when they're traumatic and bad But what we discovered in the last few years is that You can actually use this mechanism of reconciliation to update memories So whenever you retrieve a memory, it's actually changing and you incorporate new information available at the time of retrieval So really, you don't remember the original event, you just remember your last retrieval of it And with that, Tyler, take us away on memory pill We're in C, right? Yep, great Music Took a stroll through my brain, oh what a cluttered place My whole neurons, low on synaptic space Stuff in there that I need, that I need to erase Just give me a pill, oh yes or please Just give me a pill, wash away my memories Music Birth trauma and childhood stress, chicken pox, what a mess Baby sitters and nuns and priests to whom I confess Oh girlfriends and algebra, playground bullies and achievement tests Yeah I want to get rid of them, yeah Each Tyler I remember, I'll take a pill Block that storage, make my memory nil Just give me a pill, oh yes or please Just give me a pill, wash away my memories Music Took a stroll through my brain, oh what a cluttered place My whole neurons, low on synaptic space Stuff in there that I need, that I need to erase Just give me a pill, oh yes or please Just give me a pill, wash away my memories Just give me a pill, oh yes or please Just give me a pill, wash away my memories Music Alright, memory nil Applause Jolydouson Okay, so we're going to do two more songs One is called Brainstorm And it's about something really bad happening in this life Music Music It's raining in my brain, I'm feeling no pain Everybody thinks I'm insane, but I'm just on my game I don't see the harm Just have a brain storm Walk the race and cause it's my magic in the air Emmies and flash and legs are flashing All I've again Don't have a camera Music Rain keeps coming out But some warm around Everybody's staying clear Oh, I'll disappear I'm not alone It's just a brain storm It's hard to be no more despair Mustard some grand It's a damn I'm on a tear I'm on a tear Music Music Music Music Starms picking up steam Lines in a dream Tines us standing still I've got a chill Maybe that's just the norm When you're in a brain storm Walk the race and cause it's my magic in the air I'm on a tear Feeling so pain I'm on a tear I'm on a tear I'm on a tear Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music Music