 I'm Ed Nursecien, I'm Director of the Centre. Today's program is on shame. Before I introduce the participants, I should tell you that the next program in June is on status, status, and then in September we have a program on a round table on lying, and then we are working on other round tables, including on the suicide. So, I'm going to be very brief with the introductions. The full biography of the participants is on the website, but I have a printed version here that I can send a round and you can just pass it a round if you want. Joseph Adamson is Professor Emeritus of English from McMaster University. Richard Schweider is the Harold Higgins Swift Distinguished Service Professor, Department of Comparative Human Development University of Chicago. Michael Lewis is the University Distinguished Professor of Pediatrics and Psychiatry, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School. The program was suggested to me by Cathy O'Neill, who is there, and she is a mathematician and founder of ORCAA. So open for you to start. Well, thank you guys so much for coming. Can everyone hear me? I think it's very important to speak loudly and clearly. And I'm going to be kind of like the dumbest person here because I am a mathematician and an author and a data scientist. I wrote a book about how data science is fucking up democracy, and then I decided to write another book about shame, and I have really no right to do so. And I'm so grateful for these distinguished professors to come tell me what I've got it wrong about it. So I was just hoping that we could start by talking about what we mean by shame, the definition, and then I would love to jump in and say all the bad ideas I have about it so I could be corrected. But maybe we'll just start by, if you guys are into it, talk about what we mean by shame. And for me, it's probably the best to say that I think of shame as something I am rather than something I did. So it's not guilt, guilt is something I feel bad about. I could apologize and it would be over, potentially. Shame is something that is sort of a deeper meaning about my worthiness and my worthy of something. So for me, the sort of deep experience of shame probably came from my parents fat-shaming me. For years and years, I was told I was unattractive, would never get married, would never be worthy of attention from men. And that was sort of my first sort of inhabiting of shame, which I think of, I sort of think of there as being a sort of four stages of shame. The first stage is just inhabiting shame, feeling ashamed on a daily basis. It's not always terribly shame to like sometimes worse than others. But just sort of feeling, yes, I am unworthy. That is inhabiting shame, the first stage. The second stage happened when I was a teenager and I met people who didn't mind my body and thought actually I was attractive. And sort of like a different context, a different group of people around me that didn't have the norm that I was unattractive. And I went back to my family and to my high school friends and they shamed me again for my body. It provoked a different kind of experience for me, which I call outrage, outrage and denial. I was outraged by that. I was like, I don't deserve that. And yet it did make me feel ashamed. So it sort of both pushed me back into stage one and also gave me this new experience of stage two. And I'll just briefly say for me, the stage three, which I call facing the facts, is we came much later when I was an adult, when I had three children and I had all the sex I wanted from all the men I wanted. And I was like, wait, hold on a second. They actually were lying to me. It was wrong on its face. The facts were wrong. So that's called stage three for me, like facing my personal facts saying, wait a second, turn off the noise, turn off the Weight Watchers, the industries trying to profit from me, the people trying to maintain power because I'm very attractive and I'm not, ignore all that. What are my actual facts at hand? And that's what I call stage three facing the facts. And then stage four for me is when I ultimately think, it's not about me anymore. It's about saying what the what the heck are we doing to people, to children, by shaming them for their bodies? That's when you sort of see it from the outside. And I'll stop there because I've already provoked, I'm sure you guys have all such a yeah, go. Can everyone hear me with this device on? Well let me try a definition that I think overlaps with yours and then I'd like to put out a proposition and give an illustration. And I also think we're going to have to introduce different kinds of societies because your description of your experience and relationship to it, I think comes from a particular kind of subculture in which creative individualism, liberation and a big focus on self is privileged over a lot of other ways of thinking about society. I take it your parents were actually trying to instruct you in success and status and the norms of society when they were doing that. And the capacity to actually reject it, it seems to me a separate issue from analysis of shame per se. I would say shame is something like the fear of being seen as defective by others and it can take many variations and what the defects are can vary. I want to propose that shame and perhaps embarrassment are more powerful motivators of behavior than the fear of death. And the example I would give would be let's say, you know, if you go back to 1889, there were the Zulu wars in South Africa and the British had machine guns and knew how to fire rifles and they killed a lot of Zulu's. But those Zulu's who went on and fought them for six months would start with a group of five buddies in a village. They would create a bond between themselves. They actually would vomit into a pit, put the vomit, the collective vomit in a gourd which each of them wore around their necks and would run in beautiful coordinated ways into battle fifteen miles away to shore death. They knew they were going to be killed and the machine guns were there and mowed them down. Gallipoli is another example in which I think the fear of shame or not showing courage or not being there with your buddies is more powerful than the fear of death. There are lots of social situations of course in which shaming is extremely powerful. Lois Peake who has studied preschools in Japan for example describes the classroom in a you know four and five year olds in Japan. The teacher walks in, the kids are sitting there and say, teacher we are ready to learn mathematics and the teacher could look around and say, but so and so doesn't have his book with him today. No one can learn mathematics today. And that night the mother or parents of that kid who didn't bring his book are going to hear from every other mother around and be powerfully shamed into making sure that they bring that book to school. And of course this is one of the ways in which the social order is carried forward. People have a sense of shame. We don't want someone to be shameless. In fact in the community I work in in India which is an orthodox Hindu temple town to be full of shame is to have propriety to be civilized to understand the rules. It's an extremely powerful and positive kind of cultivation of self restraint for example and an understanding of the state instructors that are there and a willingness to play the part within this choreography of a hierarchical interrelated set of statuses. And you're going to hear about it if you start deviating from that. But anyway that's my first pass. Yeah I'm very struck by what Catherine is saying because I'm working on The Mill and the Floss right, George Elliott. There's a little girl focused on the story, the novel, and she's relentlessly shamed a child because her complexion is the wrong color. Her hair is too dark. Her personality is too big. I mean she has very intense emotions and strong attachments. So she's breaking all the norms in that society. Richard Rick was saying. And it's become very crushing for her. It's actually an amazing novel in terms of how shame works and how destructive it can be. Although it can be a very positive effect too. It's a correct, it can be a correct situation. And then her family has an economic downfall, social disgrace. So it's a kind of piling on of shame. Because she's a girl, she's restricted. So she's constantly being shamed just for her gender. The novel ends very tragically because she finally experiences that kind of outrage you're talking about and acts on it impulsively and elopes with a young man who is, you know, she's from a lower class. She elopes with a higher class gentleman and basically the idea she disgraces her family. She's ostracized. She can find no way of getting out of this impasse in her society and the novel ends quite tragically. But there are more positive versions of that story in Elliot too where it is a motivator, very strong motivator for what Sylvan Tompkins calls, you know, restoring the good scene. I find his work quite interesting because he sees it as the least punishing of the negative effects as long as it's not magnified because it, you know, inherent in it is a desire to get back to those good feelings, though that there's sort of positive feelings in the positive scene. So it could be a remarkable motivating force in human life. I think the real problem is when it becomes toxic, when it's relentless and magnified when someone's growing up, then it becomes problematic because you internalize it and it's very difficult to break that internalization and to find a new way to be. So it struck me very much. You're the story you were telling there. It's very much like you might enjoy. I don't know if you've read it, Elliot, but I have. Yes. Yes. You know what I'm saying? Go ahead and go. These are tough. Well, it's, as Yogi Baris said, it's a deja vu all over again. I was in this room perhaps 25 years ago and the topic was shame. So it's a persistent and an important topic. Well, because, as I mentioned earlier, I think we're becoming a massive shame culture and that may be why it's back. Well, it's certainly the case. I had written a book called Shame the Exposed Self, which in the area of human development and psychology and emotion, not a work and it was of both a synthesis and an attempt to produce theory, a testable theory because the coinage that gets you ahead in my part of the world is you need to subject this to proof. It could be logical proof, but more in empirical. But it's a topic, an emotional development, which interestingly enough, Darwin, I just wrote a chapter for someone, on Darwin's treatment of shame, a new Sylvan well, and we spent the year having lunch together. Sylvan only ate two orders of coleslaw for the entire year. And I also tell you another thing about Sylvan. And Damian Uranian, the professor who goes to the horse races is Sylvan Tompkins, modeled after him. Sylvan was a wonderful creature, he wrote two of the most incomprehensible volumes that had read, but it generated a lot of thought and interest. But I really think if we want to, from an historical point of view, we should go back to Darwin and read Darwin. When King Close, the major problem Darwin had, is he could not create a theory of the mind cognition. So even in motion, he moved to the measurement of blushing, which he claimed was a good measure of it. Part of Darwin's problems, as we know, was he had trouble with a gradualism. He had trouble going from animals, for primates, to humans. And in fact, he toyed with, and it's in his time, was considered not inappropriate, but we do. Both people of color and people with an intellectual disability, he saw as a middle group between great apes and humans, and he toyed with that idea about the emotions. His major problem was he couldn't distinguish between what he called, and I call the self conscious emotions, which we've touched on, which includes guilt, which includes embarrassment, which includes shame. And if we like, we could also include a hubris, which turns out to be, you know, in the English language, we have one word for pride. And that's pride goeth before the fall, which is a negative attribute, and proud of one's accomplishments, which is consider a motivator and a positive. We only have one word for it, so hubris is probably an attempt of mind to try to move us away to have two words for the pride we're talking about. It turns out that within the fact, on a Linux tradition, the confusion between shame and guilt has been enormous, and it probably wasn't until the periods when I was writing and several analysts for writing, Nathan said it was a derivative or a think up, but he clearly was catching on to the idea that you had to make a distinction between them. In the meeting that I attended, I sort of sat back, unusual for me, and let the analyst talk about what they meant by shame and guilt. And of course, if we did this with what we mean by shame, we wouldn't come up with many definitions. So we know it's important, and we know more over that there's we have to take culture into account. And Darwin had another idea, and he talked about things which he called action patterns. So I'm going to make a ridiculous proposal to suggest that we don't learn shame. Shame is an action pattern, and it's set off by the instigators or thoughts about the self. And thoughts about the self are called self attribution, and that self attributions of a certain kind are likely to lead to certain emotional states, motivators of action. And I think Rick picked up that the idea of shame as an extremely negative emotion is questionable. Shame has clearly a very definite function. Having one of the functions of shame is it stops you dead in your tracks. You suddenly became suddenly developed a damaged self, and you have to do something about that. Guilt on the other hand does not lead to a damaged self, it leads to reparation. And so if you wanted to measure it, and since I'm interested in how it starts, I look at the children, I can measure what a child does when they fail at something, they know they failed, and there's some children who try to repair the failure. There's some children who collapse, and there's some children who in fact don't show any of these self negative self conscious like emotions. And I want to tell you about the action pattern is specifically. Okay, what is the action pattern? I would have said it's hiding. Well, I think I think you're absolutely. But it's stopping. And they're so been had some idea he called it interruption, but it's not interrupting as the consequence of the act that's the consequence of the action pattern is to stop you hiding is another way is part of the stopping. So I would certainly agree that hiding we measure it by in fact the collapse of the body, which is an attempt to hide the self. The phenomenal logical experience is I want to die, hide and disappear or die. So it is clearly a self inhibit. But let me give you this example because one of the things that I discovered in 60 years of studying this is it's very, very tricky. And I've come to a much greater appreciation with people trying to think about it in a more dynamic way. When you're studying it, you have to stop it and look what just happened. So let me give you a story that years ago a patient told me is driving a car. It was at night. It was on a lonely road. It was raining and very hard to see anything. And as he's driving, he hits a door, runs in front of him and he hits that door. He slams on the brake and his first thoughts are what a horrible person I am. I've just killed a dog. Now he doesn't like to have that thought and the action pattern associated. So he says, how do I get out of this? I mean, it isn't safe, literally. But very quickly, he decides, one, he's not the cause of this mishab, this failure. Why? Because it's raining and it's dark and moreover, the owner let the dog run wild. So all of a sudden, he starts up with this powerful self-crunching action pattern. But given the flexibility that we humans have, we can change our mind. We can reinterpret it. And indeed, what he does is he blames another. Now the interesting thing, if it becomes a personality, namely, one constantly in a situation in which the self might be injured. Constantly, we interpret into other attributions. Essentially, it's either not my fault. By the way, males are much more likely to use it than females. The attribution is it's not my fault. I'm sorry, it's not my fault. Females tend to use the attribution and is my fault more. But the fact of the matter is that I think the example characterizes that in front of us is what I call standards, rules, and goals. These are cultural events that are taught. These have no unique content. However, when one has in the self attribution the capacity to think about oneself. That's a whole other story on the development of that. But having that capacity, you enter into a chain, a process, and depending on the outcome of that process, you end up with the kind of action pattern that you're trying to describe. So, let me stop. I think this is going to be one of several cases where we're going to have to be very clear about the boundary conditions we put about any generalizations we make. Because the mode of control that you just described is not going to be readily available. For example, in that Hindu temple town where I've been working for several decades, because there's not going to be the capacity to blame others or to see yourself as a victim, the reasoning is going to be you always reap what you sow in life. And anything that happens is a consequence of your prior actions. And you come into the world with spiritual debts. And what you're doing constantly in life is trying to reduce the spiritual debts you have because the more spiritual debts you have, the more likely you're going to be in the kind of circumstance you describe. The very fact that it was a rainy day and someone let their thing happen to you, why did that happen to me? It happened to me because of my past behavior and the spiritual debts that I bring in. And so you're constantly trying to reduce those spiritual debts to various means that are available to you that could be living a righteous life, could be eating the correct food. But in any case, this whole mode of causal analysis of which you say, I'm not responsible, is not going to be available as a construal. There's mostly many problems with what I've said. One of them is a kind of a backward backtracking in cognitive science. They've caught on to backtracking. For those of you who don't know, a year ago, people wanted to discover how come an animal eat something and 24 hours later get sick from it and has learned not to eat that thing. And the argument is that we can move time, space, and an interesting way, forwards and backwards, our associative systems allow us to move backwards and forwards in time. So it is absolutely the case. If we could talk about religions as well, I want to step up a little bit because as a mathematician, I think very axiomatically. And I think we all are actually kind of agreeing. I want to go back to what you said. It's like there's a norm here, right? You shame someone with respect to a norm. I was shamed with respect to a body norm. What you're describing is when there is no other norm. Those people did not have access to a community where it was okay to be fat. It wasn't fatness. It was like this concept of a debt to the gods. If they had, let me imagine if some of them had gone on a study abroad program. It's actually not the gods. Okay, the nature. My point is that they were ensconced in this norm group. So of course, they're not going to see a different way of thinking about it. And I just want to say, like to another point you made, we are living in a shaming culture. So I'm just going to throw on another layer here. I also had another experience of shame. When I worked in finance, I worked at a hedge fund during the crisis with Larry Summers. And I said, oh my God, we screwed up the world. I felt ashamed. I quit my job. I joined Occupy Wall Street. And I attempted to shame the government to improve financial regulation. And that was shame. I think shame is great. Shame is very, very useful. You were punching up. I was punching up. Right. So I like to think of shame in three categories. Punching up. Punching down. And I think shaming someone for their body, something that they can't control, is punching down. What about the usefulness for shame just for the person, independent of, because you're only talking about being shamed or shaming. Yes. But what just feeling of having shame or feeling shame? I mean, shame, as you point out, it can be very useful for cohesion in a culture. I shame, for that matter, I shame my children when they don't do their chores. It's a lubrication to get people to follow the rules without having to explain the rules every single time and actually have to administer punishment when they don't. Let me just finish my framework and then I'll let you guys respond. I think there's a third type of shame that's getting more and more prevalent in this culture. There's punching up, shame, there's punching down shame. The third type I call punching nowhere, shame. And punching nowhere, shame, is when we try to, we sort of performatively shame people that will not care. And what I'm thinking here, emblematic example, is when people on the left, because I'm on the left, when I go to Twitter, I'm seeing my lefty friends, they are retweeting Trump or Trump's son and saying, and sort of saying something to him in their retweet to sort of try to shame Trump. It's ludicrous. It's ludicrous. Like, do you think they are going to care what you're saying? But it's definitely an attempt to shame. It's a failed attempt to shame. It's a performative thing. And my question is, what is the end result of that? And my feeling is it's not just a waste of time. It's actually a problem. And I think the anti-vaxxing movement is largely a product of that. And I think the incels, which are the young, mostly white men who are misogynistic online, talking to each other about how terrible women are, and actually going at sometimes and killing people, killing women, is a very direct reaction to this shaming, performative shaming punching nowhere called charity. People call this virtue signaling also. It's that's what I mean by performance. I'm performing righteousness by shaming Don Jr. Everyone retweet me. But, you know, it doesn't actually, in number one, it doesn't shame him. And number two, it just makes the other people more dehumanized. It dehumanizes them. It sort of focuses on us versus them. Right. Well, there's a sense in which, you know, I mean, I think there's a certain picture of shame as oppressive, which comes from people who don't like living in closed communities where there are these norms that everyone shares. And they feel oppressed by it, and they want out. It's sort of the creative individual who is willing to be transgressive with regard to the norms, and they go to New York City, okay, rather than live in the small community. Now it seems to me what's happened, however, is that the surveillance that goes on in small communities, which produces shaming of all kind, often to maintain social order, and often quite effectively, has now returned in the form of Twitter. It's now reformed in the terms of newspapers that are constantly looking to invade and get information that people think is private. And if they can expose it, it becomes now the equivalent on a much larger scale of these small communities. And ironically, that's what we're doing. The technologies have broken down the private public distinction. The idea that you could find an area where you couldn't be shamed because you could draw the shade, you could close the door. It was in a private realm where you could be experimental with transgressive behavior, and leave it there, is no longer possible. And that reaches the essentially, we found a way to have a technology that turns us into a small community again with all of these kinds of attempts you're describing. Well, to humiliate people. You can do a text on me of shame. But there are anything can shame you if you have a standard or rule, a goal, and you don't – and these are cultural determinant. Although there was some argument, historically, that shame or charm, the German for back or back side was in fact, and the early attempts at trying to address it was around toilet training and shame was there. Having lived a long life, when I was six or seven, I needed glasses. And it was shameful to wear glasses. You were called for eyes. Now we're not ashamed of wearing glasses. There's a – as you age, there's a hearing loss, okay? And I wear hearing aids. And hearing aids are designed, the technology, mostly that they should be hidden because wearing hearing aids is shameful. So we can change readily what is or isn't shameful. The idea to be helpful is there has to be some cultural standard or rule. Now interestingly enough, you could have a rule to be shameful. That is, it's good to be shameful. And so you could find many things that you might need to sweep away because you would step away. You can't eat a plant that's a root because there might be insects and destroy. So I don't know how useful it is. I think it is useful if we want to go contemporary to look at what's happening in not only our culture, but everywhere. To begin with, when I got a bad grade as the son of parents born in Europe turned to the century, but nonetheless, I was ashamed for their shame that I didn't get a good grade. I was not only ashamed for myself, I was ashamed that my parents' shame, well, that doesn't seem much the case anymore. But it seems to me that we need to not talk about the different kinds. Let me just tell you what the observation in these meta-analyses are. One, amount of narcissistic behavior has enormously increased. Any scale or the various scales that supposedly measure it show an increase in this country. Two, an increase in perfectionism. That is, being overwhelmed by the concern for making an error. Three, decrease in empathy. All of these are an emphasis. I think these things come about. Rick has hinted at it. These things come about because the self has become an increasing object to the self. So that selfies, tattoos, communication, it's a common knowledge especially in the age group in this room, that you watch a couple sitting, each taking a picture of their dish, sending it to other people. These are very technologically advanced, very complex behavior. The more you pay attention to yourself, the more trouble you ultimately get in. It's a pretty safe hypothesis. A baseball slump occurs because you start to think that you are in a slump and thus the kind of physical timing that you need to hit a ball, a swing at something before as it's leaving the hand of the pitcher gets disrupted. I have the problem when I have to shift. Do self-conscious. Well, I think the quote is, if you think you stink. That's right. So fundamentally, on a steep hill, when I'm driving a shift, which I learned to drove most of my life, I was in Berkeley on Cedar Avenue, which has some steep hills that, and now you have to put it in neutral, and there's a car behind you, and you've got to shift into first and very steep, and you just start to think about, I may have trouble shifting, you're going to have trouble shifting. The whole point in motor action is to get it out of the operating system because there are better things in your head to be doing with. The point is, if in fact it is the case that we have become more self-involved as a way to be happy, I don't know what the goals are, that fundamentally you would get an increase in shame because you're paying attention to yourself, and therefore you would need mechanisms to get away from it, which is narcissism, a very powerful mechanism. It's not my fault, or I didn't make a mistake. It's a defensive mechanism. Well, they're essentially, yes, they're defensive mechanisms for the increase. So the decrease in empathy is it's their fault, their poor, it's their fault to be poor. They are quite handsome. They should live all the way with Shamer and Chief in the country right now. That's what he's talking about. Well, Kathy, you are... I'm sorry, I disagree. I mean, we're wrong like Darwin thought that getting a red in the face was meant your shame. It's too easy. It's not about selfies. Selfies is narcissistic. I just, obviously, it's vain, obviously. I think people who do that are more vulnerable. They're more vulnerable to shame. People who take selfies, like just defining that way. They are more vulnerable to shame, but I think the worst aspect of modern social media is are not the selfies. They're just annoying. The worst aspect are the self-righteous shammers who are dehumanizing others and who are working actively to decrease our empathy. I think the empathy is the key. We are decreasing our empathy to people we don't agree with. We were like, if you think that, you must be a monster. And honestly, we say that about people with whom we agree, 85% of the time, but we found the 15%. Social media helped us find it. The 15% where we disagree and we're like, oh my God, I thought I liked you, but you're a monster. Now I know. That's the kind of performative self-righteous shaming that is a problem. Selfies is a small thing. It's an interesting difference between shame and guilt in this sense because you do need the cooperation of the other person to feel guilty if you try to, you might shame them and hope they feel guilty about something they've done. But to simply shame, you just need to leave a mark. It doesn't need to be reciprocated. Anyway, I think you need the cooperation of the other. I would have thought that guilt could be just between you and your ego ideal and if you don't live. No, I mean, if you need the other to confess, if that's the way in which you're going to unload your guilt. If you're posting online and you want to leave a shame mark on someone, you don't need them to reciprocate. That's why it goes on and it goes on despite its utility. What do you think the response is when you're the receiver of that? If you know that you've 85% agree with the person and they're accusing you of being a monster. I personally feel terrible that happens, but I'm afraid. What else would you feel? What else would you feel? You'd feel angry. You'd feel outraged and you would say, no, you're the monster. And that's the point, it becomes a feedback loop, a dynamical system where I guess I was getting at the idea that it doesn't require as much empathy or back and forth for you to simply leave a mark that intends the shame versus to engage someone and to make them feel remorseful. It sounds infantile, right? I know you are, but what am I? Yes. At that level. I'd like to pick up something you might go and just said, because I do have this sense that there are certain pre-potent areas that it's easier to shame than other areas, that it's just any arbitrary rule. And I'll get to this way. If you look at the explanations of illness around the world as an anthropologist, why people think they're suffering, there are very, there's a big three. The most frequent thing people do is point interpersonal influences on themselves, like witchcraft, evil eyes, sorcery, some things be friends and neighbors who envy me who are making me feel sick. And then there end up being moral explanations in which they blame themselves for their suffering and they think they've transgressed in some way. And then there are of course biochemical explanations, which it turns out are not the most frequent on a worldwide scale. The other two are an interpersonal or far and away the most common. But in the moral domain, when you look at what transgressions lead people to think, I did that and that's why I'm suffering right now. There's a small number and they end up being sexual, food and authority relationships. So if you kick your father and six months later you go blind, you're not going to fail to wonder whether you're blind because you kicked your father. There's something about those areas of experience in life that somehow are pre-potent and I wouldn't be surprised shaming could work that way. I think it's a perfectly reasonable hypothesis indeed that there may be pre-potent, that is failures or evaluations of one's behavior vis-a-vis some kind of standards, unique ones may be pre-potent in fact. And there would be good reason to suggest that these should be very important and frequent enough events so that you protect against violating the rules because it really is going to hurt you. One of the problems is now we're going to introduce embarrassment. Let me say a word about it. If I sat down with anyone in this room and said, tell me about things that embarrass you, you would, if you knew me for a while, you would tell me about embarrassing things. If I said, tell me about the things that shame you, you don't. And so it's been said that shame gets you into therapy but prevents you from getting better. There's no comparison because the lesson tends to operate. We know that there's two kinds of embarrassment. There's embarrassment of being the object of others' attention. Darwin talked about it and it is certainly the case. I could show you if for example the group around the table decided we would all simply point at another person in unison. For no reason we randomly selected it. That person being pointed to would get embarrassing. For example when you're introduced and the introducer says very nice things about you, you certainly enjoy it but you are certainly embarrassed. Now you could argue you should be embarrassed but I can show you in 18-month-olds, to 24-month-olds when this embarrassment comes in. People play a game of pointing to each other and they tend to embarrass. The object of attention turns out to be a very early form of embarrassment. It also starts to involve body because the early forms is may he. So if you point to a child at 20 hertz who recognizes itself in a mirror by touching its nose and you point to it, the child will show you embarrassment. If you ask children, how many of you have children, grandchildren and the parent says show grandfather or grandmother the new thing you do and the child shows embarrassment. Why isn't that just changed, the mild form of shame? Well because it seems by the reporter not to be shameful. People have trouble interpreting this because it also turns out to be an individual difference. Shy people are in fact those people who over respond to being the object of others' attention. So there seems to be a distribution in the population of people who when they have the object of attention show embarrassment. This is a fair thing that people have different thresholds for shame, lower hires. Yes, they're wired that way. It's a way, we're wired that way. Yeah and so there must be a usefulness to shame. Most of the conversation has been about shame as a problem that you can shame. You gave the example of your school, they shamed you and you felt ashamed about your parents. But there must be some reason why we have this emotion of shame. It's absolutely very important socially for one thing. You know if you do something let's say you're at a dinner party and your host is going on, this won't happen tonight. And you're irritated about something, maybe not even something to do with him. And you lose it, you lose your temper. And you insult it. Exactly and you're right. Now you know, I think a lot of us have done something like that. And you feel terrible, right? The feeling is you just feel like you're, like there's this sort of sickness sinking, right? You just feel so ashamed of what you've done. Because you have shamed him. Well I think more you've, yeah, more you've acted in an entirely inappropriate way. It draws attention to you. And you there, and so you, you know, we've all done this, I've done it. You know, you go away, you feel terrible, the next day you go over and you want to make it right. I think this is what Tomkins is talking about when he says that shame and here it in shame is a desire to restore the positive feeling, right? To restore what he calls the good seed. And you apologize. And you say, I don't, you know, I behaved so inappropriately, I'm very sorry, you know. So look at the way. And so that's highly functional because it's a highly functional. Well it's more functionally if it prevented you from doing what you did. Well it often does, right? I mean it often prevents you from it. You know, let's say the person is, and they correct themselves before they do it, right? They control themselves. It's a very important mechanism to reduce shame, confession. You say, just as you indicated, I'm sorry I did that. Forgive me. So clearly there are mechanisms to reduce it. One of them is displacement to blame the other and become angry. And other is to internalize it and move toward depression. I am a worthless creature now and in the future. And the other one is to make fun of yourself, interestingly enough, especially in embarrassment. So Michael, what you make of socialization techniques designed in some subcultures to induce them. So for example, Heidi Fung has done observations of children and families in Taipei, in Taiwan. And the mother when she's around other associates or relatives or friends will bring in her young child who has transgressed in some way like you was describing and has them narrate. Their transgression. Tell them how bad you were. And it's not a confession. It's not really there to get rid of some feeling. It's there to recapitulate it and to have this child essentially cultivate a sense of shame by inducing it in a very public way. Presumably that's going to be relatively effective in having it not happen. And when she shows the video tapes at an American Psychological Association meeting, everyone views it as child abuse. And she has to stop showing it because it provokes such a discussion. So public shaming was a thing in this country. There was a book called So You've Been Publicly Shamed Written by John Ronson recently. Or maybe Ron Johnson. I can't remember how he says his name. But he did a study about this, a sort of New England early America, sort of scarlet letter type stuff. And he researched sort of the history of it. And it stopped eventually, not because it became less useful, but because it was so harsh. Like the public view, the people who came to see the public shaming were so into it that it was embarrassing to the authorities. That's why they stopped doing it, not because it didn't work. So I have a mini example of this. I lived with a six year old daughter and 10 year old son in rural India for a year and they went to a local convent school. And one day my son said to my wife, I don't want to go to school today. And she explored it. Why didn't you want to go to school today? Because he had seen when you didn't do well on a math exam in that school, they pinned it to your back and you wore it all day long around the school. That was their technique for public shaming. Which, you know, it's a complicated thing. We can view that as harsh. He obviously was, we come from a subculture where we weren't going to let that happen. Nevertheless, internally, I'll bet those kids are all over the world doing really good math down. And Zimla has several books that are 25 years old that documents very clearly spare the rights, spare the rights for the child. Fundamentally, the theme to teach moral behavior. You teach, you will forgive me, that you were born in sin. Okay, and that's what we have in Christianity, the belief you are born in sin. It's a different form, but you come into the world with a long history of transgressions and friar lives. You're not innocent, blank slate. There will be there are techniques which, for the most part, we've given up as publicly acceptable, but in fact are employed. How many parents, if you watch them with their children and the child does something, switches up their nose, for those of you who can see my face, which is a semi-discussed face. That's disgusting. You're disgusting. Discussed is a very, very powerful shame-a-listener. And so we were talking about, and I wanted to hear you tie together what you believe is the connection between embarrassment and shame before you do. I just wanted to add this extra ingredient, which is these do all have biological rudiments. Like disgust, expression, the early stages of which embarrassment can be elicited in children, etc., suggest to me that these potential, I would say, components of shame start even on a very biological basis. Before they're co-opted by society and form shame. The study divorce in couples in trouble has pointed out that when one member of the couple exhibits a shame faced toward the other for some action or some statement, the consequence of that is either the one receiving the disgust face shows a depressive reaction or, in fact, gets angry back, you know, how dare you shame me. So clearly, we're going to have to worry about shame publicly, but also shame privately. But there's a shame between the same, which I'll, that's disgusting, and that's, you know, that's shameful or shaming the child. I think there's a significant difference between the two. Well, okay. You know, I think we have an issue with shame which says fear of being perceived as disgusting. That's actually what we'll be. Well, it depends on what we say. It's certainly. Don't eat that. That's disgusting. That's different from your disgusting. Yeah. It's a question of whether you should be ashamed of yourself. It doesn't seem to me to be as toxic as saying that you're disgusting. You're a disgusting person because a disgusting, that's very rejecting. Yes. Right. That's like, that's very distancing. Where in shame, there's always a bridge back. But how it's heard may defend may depend on the child to a degree. I would like to add something a bit different. I would like to add something a bit different because it is, from everything you are saying, the implication is that you become frequently ashamed because you have been shamed off and growing up. That's not necessarily, I don't think it's the experience of psychoanalysts and generally, certainly not my experience. Some people have more shame, some people have less shame and it's not based on to what degree their parents or their teachers or the school shamed them. Well, it seems to do and the psychoanalytic idea that has a lot more to do. Sorry. You become victimized if you are repeatedly ashamed and becoming victimized means you become the victim. And so the report was that I really was shameful, not that my parent necessarily did that to me. Indeed, what I would like to say if we could do such an experiment is to say in a high shaming family, what does the child do when the child finally becomes in charge and the parents are now old? They don't talk about old people being abused but a sweet revenge to a lifetime of being ashamed. So I wanted to get back to Kathy's observation about the historical change that took place, let's say from the Massachusetts Bay Colony or 17th century Puritanism and its morality. Because I do think in some sense the cyber stocks are back right now and we're very much like that period once again given the technologies that we have. But I do feel that it's important to think about societies that liberate individuals from communal ethics of community type structures. And when that happens I think they begin to see those techniques as harsh even though they were effective. But here's a triad that think about the following three emotions. Happiness, shame and anger. And if I ask you which is most different from the other two? Happiness, shame, anger, which is the odd one out? If I do that in a University of Chicago class the response is either going to be happiness is the odd one out is most different or some people will say shame is the odd one out. And it's largely based on a hedonic view of the emotions. Does it feel good or doesn't? It feels good. It feels good to be happy, doesn't feel good to be shamed or angry. Let me finish. Some people say shame because they think that means the ego has been diminished whereas if you're happy and angry you're full of yourself. If I do this in the Indian community I work in the overwhelming response is anger is the most different from the other two. Which is a very rare response in our subculture. And for them shame and happiness are the glue of social relationships and anger is destructive of social relationships. And that's a totally different way of viewing it. And I think it has correlates in the way in which their society is organized on the degree to which individualism versus some form of collectivism is a part of the organization of social life. And that puts boundaries on a lot of the generalizations we make about whether something's useful or not what our own evaluative reactions are to it and so forth. Let's come back to what's broadened if we can to bring in the other kinds of self-conscious emotions which you were starting to do. Such as I've claimed that there are two kinds of embarrassment one is a very basic early does not require elaborate cognition. The child shows it soon after it's thought using personal pronouns like me and mine and that is an individual difference in their reaction to being the object of attention. That's easy to do an elaborate story setting. You bring the kid in and you start complimenting the child on how pretty they look or how handsome the look or whatever you ask the child to do things like dance to or banging the tumeric and what you see in the children being the object of attention they show embarrassment. About a year and a half later when you now start to incorporate the standards the rules of the goals of your family and the society at large you now have another embarrassment which is embarrassment against some kind of standard. I mean that starts to move us toward shame but I put to you that least in the sculpture where we have two words if I ask you to tell me something that abasses you you would have more readily willing to do it than if I asked you about something that changed you. This is not just intensity we also have the word humiliation which is a very intense form of shame. Or mortification which as you mentioned earlier you're dying of shame. I mean I think people experience embarrassment of some kind or another every day on a mild form. Sure but there are certain things that really define you okay so if someone says Michael your parallel parking is really atrocious. I may not like it I may feel yeah you're right I'm going backwards it's become more difficult as I've aged. But if they said Gee your last book is absolutely horrible it would elicit more embarrassment of shame with a bad reveal. So clearly there are different aspects of ourselves which are more important. I'm going to if you guys don't mind layer on one more layer to this conversation which I'm fascinated thinking about because I we've talked a lot about the individual experience of shame you've talked a little bit about norms within a culture and how that changes it. I want to talk about group shame. Group shame and I'll just throw out an example the Catholic church. You know remember I talked about the phases of shame. You're sitting in the shame there is outrage and denial of the shame then there's facing the facts and then they're saying stepping outside and saying this is this is what happens. You know I'm just going to throw that out the pope came out and he started talking about oh you know sexual abuse of children is a terrible thing it's really terrible isn't a terrible. He didn't actually say this is what happened in the church this is what we're going to do about it. He never really cleaned house. He never really went through stage three. He kind of jumped to stage four like you can all forgive me this is an apology quote unquote of course I'm putting my take on it. But my point is that I want to talk about how groups inhabit shame how they get outraged by accusations and how they come to see the truth see face their own facts clean their own house. How do they how do they navigate shame as groups. Well did they navigate shame was only when we told them you should have felt shame about this then they thought oh yes we did something shameful and possibly didn't. See individual let me give you another example there's a very widespread habit in this country of shaming children when they don't have enough school lunch money and what will happen is that the children will either not be fed they will just be not fed at school or their lunch will be thrown away in front of them and they sometimes even get branded on their arm. I don't have enough lunch money. The individuals who work at the lunchrooms sometimes refuse to do this policy and they get fired. So I'm not claiming that I think of that as a sort of systemic shame if you will it is created as a policy and it is perpetrated by groups not every single individual in the group has to agree with it as a policy because they might actually find it to shaming. But for that matter I mean obviously lots of priests were doing terrible things but not every priest thought that was a good idea. Like we can't assume that it was like a unified attempt right but at the same time it is a group thing. It is a sort of a group navigation led by the Pope perhaps but like what is happening there and when are we going to actually see them get to stage three cleaning house tell us what the consequences are cleaning up their act. And who is it the same process as for an individual? That's what I'm saying. Yes. I mean you know the thing about it that is it's good news and bad news is good news because we kind of understand it. It's bad news because well I feel like I'm in stage four with gay shit bashing or fat shaming or race shaming. But I can't be in charge of everyone like how do we get the rest of you know how do we pull people in this direction? This is why you're moving toward something. Yeah. What are you moving toward? An understanding. Understanding of what? Well see the examples I just gave are all in the first category. You were talking about stages. Yeah. Tell me about stages because I don't know what that means. Stages reflect a sequence where either accommodation, biology, culture or culture or biology. So are you talking about a level of notion? I don't think so. But maybe you are. What progress amount to and what is the difference? I have all chapter in the shame book on this problem of progress. What is progress? What is progress? So what is the ideal? Let me put it this way. Tell me from your perspective what the ideal society would be. Wouldn't there be shame in it? There would not be punching down shame. So I was going to say that the examples I gave sexual abuse shaming people for being poor, shaming children for being not having school lunch money, gay bashing. Those examples are examples of punching down shame which I claim exist quite a lot. There's a lot of power being maintained around punching down shame. There's a lot of profit being made from punching down shame and I would call it invalid shame. And the idea of progress would be to get past it. And that would require that people who are shame by it say no. No, it's not acceptable. When you do those things. If you get those things that people are doing, just punch down. I characterize punching down shame as when you are shaming someone who has no choice, who has either no choice or no voice. So they either have no choice to conform to the norm or they have no power to explain themselves. So how's the lunch money work? I don't quite have a picture of that as a shame. Yeah. You've never heard of that? No. It happens in more than half the school districts in this country. Really? I mean, why is it shaming? What form does it take? What's said? What? You are refused. You did not give in food? Okay, that's the number one. You're not given food. You're deprived of food. You're considered, you're basically labeled as unworthy of food. It is the most basic form of shaming. And they are branded and you are, it's public. It is like, hey, your parents didn't pay for food. You're not going to get food. Everybody knows it in the school lunch. Even if they can't afford to give the money. Of course, it's their children. I mean, just to be clear, this is children. It's their parents that are supposed to pay. Do they have no power? Yes, right. Yes, exactly. I would love to know a source for half the school system. Okay, I'll give it to you. Well, that's hard to believe. It is hard to believe. It's outrageous, actually. The optimist, the terrible man that people are capable of perpetuating is not surprising. So whether we want to call it up or down, punching, which is fine, it's a way of attacks out of me. He applied, there's a good shame or a bad shame. If my child comes back with a paper or something they've done and they've not done well, what are you going to tell parents or the tiger moms as they're called? You shouldn't be doing that. I mean, how can we disagree with people doing these things to children? I mean, this can't be a New York. There are laws against the child abuse. So I think we can disagree about certain things. But specifically about shame. You mentioned that you were fat-chained. Yeah. Does that mean that you are more prone to shame as a result of that? Or does that mean that you are no more prone to shame than anybody else? In other words, is the implication that that kind of shaming leaves rather serious marks on the person that is indelible? Or is it that some people react one way, some people, kids react one way, some kids react the other way and some grow up without much shaming by anybody and they have more prone to shame and some don't? That's a good question. I mean, my parents shame me, I think, because they were fat. So they were sort of propagating a certain type of shame onto me. I have not done that to my children. But that's because I've thought a lot about it. You know, like I went through these stages I'm trying to describe. That's one of the reasons I came up with this taxonomy of shame is to understand when is it unfair, when is it possible to ask for it? Are you yourself more prone to shame than, let's say, your husband or your kids? I think I'm more aware of my shame. More aware. But not more prone. In other words, you don't more easily than somebody else. I would like to hear what instead of a, I'm going to put it back to you. I don't know. I'm only asking because it seems to me from my perspective and my experience, the kind of outside shaming is not what often or necessarily leads to a promise to shame later. But rather certain developments in the strength of the person's self, in their self-esteem, in their view of themselves is what contributes to how they feel later. Interesting. Let me support that. It's another life work in pediatrics. And we've been doing a study, the Fellows. We have a fellowship program and I'm in charge of the research. And there is a fellow who is studying the siblings of children who have ASD, who are autistic on the spectrum. And the idea being what does a sibling feel about having a sibling who is demonstrably different? And the interesting fondness so far is that there are a good number of the people who end up taking care of handicapped kids or kids with disabilities are, in fact, from families from which they had a close number, as well as just the opposite. So that indeed supporting what you're saying, that in fact an experience can have very different consequence. One is a social good. There are people committed to working with these children who, until now, we don't have much resource to improve, but they are working with them versus those who probably develop a, I get it and if you don't do what you are, you know. This is temperamental difference. People are born with different, comfortable or more resilient. I think they're born out of it, right? Other people are more fragile. But you know, after spending 40 years at a medical school, my thoughts about the biology of our bodies. You know, we're not all the same temperament, however we may conceive of it. There are different things. My son and daughter are 50 years old when they were babies and I would, you know, toss them up and prove them in the air. But you know, just the girl baby, the younger, she loved it. And she loves the rough and tumble, she goes in short cages and in cages protecting you from my son who was in terror of it. In fact, I want to try to get my mind around you are questioned about groups and how do they react. And I guess I need some clarification because when you say how does a group deal with its own shame? Yes. Do you mean they have in fact done something which everyone would agree is shameful or do you mean they have been shamed by some powerful group telling them to do what they're doing is shameful. So for example, we have many examples in colonial domination situations. Let's say you believe the West is best and its view of gender relations, its view of XYZ is closer to the truth than those primitives or backward peoples of the world. And you start going and dominating those groups and telling them that what they're doing with regard to gender relations, how they raise their children, all this is shameful. Now is that the kind of question we're dealing with? How do those groups then react? As we know that some groups identify with the colonials and quickly become colonialized. We know other groups have rebellions against it and have all sorts of resistance. We have revival movements that go on. But these are power dynamics that are very different from the way you framed it. We framed it with examples in which you're inviting us all to agree that's shameful what they did. Not that some group is shaming another group from its power position and those are very different situations. And I'm just wondering what you would have. After you answer, we will go to questions. Okay, great. Yeah, I mean, I think it's a great question. And I'm not sure I was scrupulously careful about the examples, but what I really want to focus on is changing norms, probably is the best way of saying it. And maybe a good example in that context is the Me Too movement. So the Me Too movement is a movement because we are changing our norms. We never actually thought it was okay to assault women. We never thought that. But the norm was that the women kept quiet. The norm has changed. And now there's a lot of group shame among the men who now feel like, oh, what I used to be doing was inappropriate. That's an example of group shame. And I'm not saying they're all actually feeling like I should feel ashamed. Some of them are outraged that these norms have changed under their feet. And how dare that norm changed? I was perfectly comfortable and now I'm a bad guy. So that is, but it's a group, nor a group shaming. And my theory is that it goes through the stages of shame similar to the way I laid them out. And I might be wrong about that. I don't mind being wrong. Just because I'm a mathematician, I'm trained to just be happy to be wrong. I love shame. If you can explain, yeah, it's actually one of those one of those freeing things as a mathematician is that you say something and someone says you're wrong. You're like, thanks for not like I won't waste my time on it. But it's useful even if it's wrong, I believe, to understand group shame as an evolution through stages similar to the individual. Okay, we'll go for questions. So there is the mic and go to it. The mic works now? I hope it works now. It was very, very interesting here today listening to everybody. Some of the things that we did not talk about today, what about people like we, everybody knows Martha Stewart, who was incarcerated for a period of time. She was shamed and then she was released from jail and Martha Stewart just picked up right from where she left off and she's on TV and she's selling her merchandise. And just recently we have Anthony Wiener, who was in some sort of a halfway house for pornography and all that. Now he was just, Anthony Wiener was released and he's thinking about going into politics again so I'm just using a couple of extreme examples that we did not talk about today. Thank you. Who wants to respond? Sounds like you're proposing banishment. I mean part of the problem is that shame is I think it fits with the change in empathy. By the way, a rules manner is, we haven't gotten to which would be a very important part of the discussion. The idea of letting it all hang out as opposed to a rules governing our behavior. So you write a thank you note for dinner whether you liked it or not. And now that it would be called lying and so the whole issue and the change in social protecting the feelings of others have given way to be authentic and indeed the election really hinged on the fact that even though he was a terrible man, he was at least authentic where she was inauthentic and so is. So the fact is that we're allowed, we have no shame about being shame is in fact what's occurring. Okay. Yeah, I just wanted to comment on individual versus institutional shame. You brought up the example of the Catholic church and why hasn't the pope felt more shame. Questions make political and financial decisions. They can't be shamed the way individuals are. But my question is to the professor, I see some agreement here. My question is to the professional psychologists among you. And this concerns the most prominent shamer, the shamer in chief. You feel that this is more strategic and purposeful than he's given credit for or on the other end of the spectrum. Does he suffer from a pathology? Well, 40, 45, 40% of the people believe that he has done nothing wrong. That is to say we're back to facts, even though you can demonstrate that he says he hasn't said something and you have a tape of him saying that he would just call it fake news. So one of the things that narcissists can do is that they change the rules, the normative behavior. So while on you're having now a man who did things that they shouldn't have done and now feel a movement to get them to feel there is also this movement and there's nothing to be ashamed about. You can make norms. You can go any way you want. You know, under or behind masked by his behaviors, which are defensive mechanisms, is toxic shame. Right? If you read anything about his upbringing, his background, he has massive shame, humiliation. These are all as narcissism almost always is. I have a paper that says defense of mechanism. He is wanting a band. He avoids, he attacks. Those are his two. Well, the device in my studio. Shame is so intolerable to him. Absolutely. That changes the laws. No changes, facts. He changes the laws. But you mentioned earlier, it claims others. You know, both of you had talked about the idea, the idea of, I don't think he's aware that he has, I don't think he'd ever admit or is aware that that's why he's doing it. So then it's a pathology. It's a pathology. Yeah. Exactly. It's a pathology. You both talked about anger as being a reaction to be accused, to be shamed by others to respond with anger. And I think you very wisely, Kathy, especially mentioned that in this purposeless shaming, I think one of the reactions of the parties that are shamed is they get angry. And unfortunately they get mobilized. This is what this shame, shame, or in chief relies on that if you try to shame me and I don't want to accept it, I'm going to get angry with you out there, you try to shame me. And that mobilizes a lot of the populace. I think I'm going to go back to that. Okay. Next question. So I just want to get back to, it's not my fault, first of all my question, but to you would be to please elaborate on why you stated that men usually say it's not my fault more than women. But before you answer that, in terms of it's not my fault, I've always been under the impression that a person that cannot take criticism or it's not my fault, they say that because they've been criticized quite a lot either by their parents or so I don't know if that has anything to do with it's not my fault, that defensive mechanism, but that goes into not being able to even take criticism. I didn't do it, it's not my fault and it's very pathological if you, so the question though really is why men were than women. Okay. I understand why that's important. If you win the lottery, you don't feel proud, you feel very happy because it's a chance you didn't cause it. Although some people will say I went to a particular store and I knew that that was, so they give themselves causality and they can feel pride because it's negotiable here. So winning the lottery and event, you don't, most people do not feel proud of winning the lottery because it's a chance it has nothing to do with you causing it. So believing that you cause it or not cause it is a very good mechanism to move you around the self-conscious emotion. If it's not my fault, then I can feel anything I want that's appropriate and so you can manipulate it's not my fault so I'll do some manipulation. Now the sex difference. There are many explanations, there are data in which you can look at when parents are teaching children in the laboratory tasks to do and the child doesn't succeed. What does the parent say? And it turns out that parents make these performance or global attributions more to girls than they do to boys. That is to say when the child is supposed to be able to do a puzzle and the child can't do it and you listen to what the child says. A parent could say on the extremes, oh you're so stupid. Why don't you get that? Parents say these things. Or they could say it's a very hard problem. Why don't you try and get and give them a strategy. It turns out that giving strategies rather than making global attributions are more likely for mothers now to give this to the boy child than to give it to the girl child. Why? I don't know why it is but I can only tell you what we think may be going on. But let me give you another one. I really think it's another reason. I think girls are much more, that is the woman kind, are much more concerned about their bodies than men. I don't know how broad it is. I can say that in most cultures that I've been to, if it's a more formal occasion, the women are better dressed than the men. The only place that might not be true is Italy. In India it's certainly my... I don't get them aside. It's not always true. It is not always true. But indeed the attending to the body is a necessity given that menstruation, which an adolescent starts with, you have to be concerned with your body. Men don't go, don't have that concern. In the research of pre-attolescent, you ask boys, what do you feel about the fleshiness under your arm or the thickness of your thighs? And a nine-year-old boy, they don't have anything to say about it. They never thought about it. And nine-year-old girls are already telling you, oh, I think this is too much and so there is a concern for the body. So the question is why is that? One solution women have said that the object, sexual objects, for men, and so they become objectified. That's a reasonable hypothesis. But an alternative one... Where does that stop my fault, Link? How's that link to that? Okay. It's... If you attend more to yourself and that's where temperament would come in, if there's more information that you are deriving out of your body sense, that information is more likely to make you think about yourself and therefore more likely to move toward the attributions. If something went wrong, I'd like to comment just on your question. I would like to add to this a little bit. Martha Stewart, was that your example? No. Whose example is that? Martha Stewart, she never would have been prosecuted if she were a man doing exactly what she did. It's the expectations of society that villainized her in the first place. Good for her for going back to work. That's what I say. I would also like to keep an eye on the Trump officials that get blamed for their terrible behavior as Trump officials like Kirsten Nielsen and Sarah Sanders. What about all the guys? When we accuse women and we shame women, it much more often and much more than we ashamed men. I say that as a person who's written journalistic essays for Bloomberg, I get unbelievable hate from the commenters as a woman. Just unbelievable. It is completely documented. I'm just saying it is socialized to a large extent. And of course, one last thing, dieting. Guess who diets? Girls. Guess why? They're told to diet. It's by their parents. So it's very, very good data that this is socialized. The Justice Department doesn't like it when people lie to public officials. And Martha Stewart was not sent to jail because of the inside of trading accusation. Inside of trading itself is a very complicated area and it's gone through lots of changes. But when you lie, when you're being interrogated by the FBI, they don't look at your gender. That's like a fundamental principle for them, whether you like it or not. I don't like it. I don't like it. I agree with you about Martha Stewart good for you. And I think it was unfair to just nail her on the procedural thing. But they do that all the time and they do it to men and women. I have a somewhat different view than Mike. I would be really skeptical of a generalization of that gender in this area because I think a really fundamental principle of action is the premise that all human beings have is that there's a relationship between action and outcome. I might. I swing an axe. Something happens. Everyday life is built on the fundamental premise of a relationship between action and outcome. And that's the default. That's where you start. If you're going to move away from it, there are special cases in which you might have a conception of something, the world being simply a lottery. It's a horrible notion. If you really think about it that way because you're losing control of your life. It's if it's that way. And the relationship of action and outcome has all sorts of manifestations for men and women. And I would bet you can find areas where men might be one way and women and other and just the opposite in some other domain. But I'd really be surprised if the most fundamental premise was what you're at. What you do has consequences and you're responsible for it. In my limited experience, because it's only from within my office, it's not based on extensive research. But in my experience, I do not see a distinction. But what I do see is that the harder the person is on themselves, the more they're tempted to say it's not my fault when they're confronted with something. The more the person is willing to accept that they've done something wrong, the less they are willing, they need to say, oh no, it's not my fault. That's a complicated question because it involves all sorts of developmental issues. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. I'm overcoming my public speaking shame by doing this. That's what I hear of something. Thank you. Good job. Thank you. My question is I always thought of guilt as being almost like the introjected parental figure telling us what to do and shame more as being part of the death drive as aggression towards ourselves. So I think that in my own opinion, to get over shame, we can sublimate that aggression outwards into more socially acceptable and positive ways, what are your views on that? I would recommend that everyone go back and see the movie Four Feathers Done by Corda. And the movie Four Feathers Done in the 1930s in which you were in a military family in England and they're going off to the Sudan to fight. And one of the buddies decides he's not going to go. And the Four Feathers are the feathers that you receive being accused of being a coward. In this case by his fiance and his buddies and the rest of the movie is about his attempt to do incredible things of courage to be accepted back into this, having been shamed so powerfully. And that seems to me as a kind of typification of how shame works in a society that has statuses, has clear goals, has notions of the good. And when you fall out of it and you are called on it, it's an incredibly powerful set of motivations that go on. And the movie is well worth seeing if you want to see, let's call it the pre-modern view of how this whole thing operates. And it doesn't fit that definition. A friend of mine last night told me, which has some truth in it, that guilt is an afterthought. Guilt is an afterthought. Is that you commit the act and then you say, oh, I feel terrible about it. It rarely starts you from committing the act. It seems to me shame is a basic, is one of the emotions we have. We have love, we have shame, we have all those things. So I don't think that's anything to do with that drive or anything. It's just an emotion that humans have. And I guess some animals are. Which I tend to think of guilt and regret as having some spatial connection because the focus is on how to correct the wrong, whereas in shame, the self is attacked, thus very powerful. So I think that definition, that distinction is probably one from a behavioral point of view and also from a general theoretical point of view, that kind of distinction is worth having. But isn't guilt simply moral shame, immorality shame, plus fear because guilt involves fear of punishment too. Well, I guess so. I mean, there's a lot of words. I'm not quite sure what they mean. I think in fact that- It means that you've made moral transgressions. There is a vast literature of which I'm not much of a part of, which in fact looks at whether when it's around achievement, but it's very relevant, is you can look at your performance or you can look at the task, for example, Carol Dweck has made a very big, a whole career based on this distinction. I can focus and say, gee, I'll give you a perfect example. You write a paper and you send the paper into a journal. These are the kind of activities I do. And back comes the paper and it's rejected and there's a whole set of criticisms. I can do one of two things depending on what it elicits in me, this failure. I can look at what they criticized and focus upon that. This will cause me a set of actions to try to repair or save the paper. If in fact the result is a damaged self, I put it in a drawer and I forget about it. And when you work with graduate students and fellows in medicine, one of the things to try to teach them and is teachable, that's interesting, from a therapeutic point of view is in fact, I don't want to hear about you, what allows you, scientist, you are, I want you to go home and I want you to list each criticism separately and write some response. Do I have to do another analysis? Do I need to read more? Focusing them on the task gets them to stay in the game and try to correct the failure. If in turn you think you're a lousy scientist, you won't want to forget it. One way of coping with that shape is to forget it and so you put it in a drawer and exactly what you say then. And in fact, you want a mechanism that stops you in your tracks. It is sufficient that you can't do this except a great cost to yourself, a steam if you like. Whereas in guilt, you fundamentally want to repair it and you can actually see it in behavior. You can see that these children. But you want to repair it in shame too. The example I gave of doing something in a program. If you do something in a social context, it's inappropriate. No, you don't. You shame yourself. In fact, one of the problems. And you want to repair it. You want to go and say, I'm so sorry, I behaved so, I don't know. Anytime. That's also representative. Okay, let's go to the next question. I'm also facing my public shame here. But my question is something that hasn't been discussed here. So I read in this book that shame is one of the main pillars of loneliness. So what do you guys think about that? I just want to understand from your loneliness. You know, I'm going to jump in and tell you how I understand shame and this is through a lot of reading. It's not my definition. And I'm trying to remember the person's name whose book is from. But it's this idea of a disintegration of self that you basically have this connection with your caretaker, when you're a child. And it's a good feeling. And then at some point they are disappointed in you. They shame you. And it feels like you do not have a self. And you're so desperate to get back into that connection that you literally do anything. And if you can't get back into that connection, you feel completely floating. You feel disintegrated. Like you do not have a connection to your mother or whatever. And that, I mean, of course, that elicits loneliness. So I think there's a very strong connection with that definition of shame, which might not maybe isn't the only one, but that definition of shame is is loneliness. It is in fact the definition of being alone when you're disconnected from everything else. Some feelings are shameful. And so you can be ashamed of being guilty, but you can't be guilty about being ashamed. And you can be ashamed about being lonely. Now the question is, if you feel lonely, can you be ashamed? Thank you. So clearly, if you are believed that you should be part of a social group, there are people who are interestingly, who don't have a lot of social interaction, much prefer to be on their computer than to go to a party. So on that loneliness may not be shameful because they don't have a value that they should be socially integrated. And Asperger is a perfect indication because part of the Asperger personality is in fact they're interested in things more than people. Okay, last question. I am wondering about the relationship between shame and the stability of a society. Because it seems to me that in very, very stable societies, whether it's a family or a larger society like our nation, shame is sometimes weaponized when the society changes. And perhaps it's a function of fear, of the change. And shame is used whether to put down a racial group or women or to impose certain standards. These things really ramp up when the society is changing, really to maintain the stability of the society. So it's almost a political weapon. Yeah, I'm going to echo you that I think we can look at our society and see that norms are changing very, very quickly. And I would even argue that people think they're changing faster than they actually are changing because we have this artificial sense of accomplishment on social media when it looks like in our tiny little corner of Facebook that we all agree that such and such is true. And in fact, it's a very small corner of Facebook. I think we actually are being misled by our intuitions around social norms. And we think things are changing faster. But that goes to your point, which is that if some people think the norm is now, you have to ask three times before having sex with someone and other people think, no, you don't even have to ask. It's not surprising that conflict emerges. And when conflict about what we thought we already knew about norms, that is right for shame. That is what shame is for. Shame is for coercing people into the norm. So if they got it wrong, actually 95% of people are getting it wrong. What the fuck is wrong with these people? It's because we actually think we've accomplished more norm changing than we have. And that's what's happening right now. And we have, I think you made the point, one of the norms that we're seeing change is the idea of being authentic rather than factual, right? Or honest. That is itself a norm that is ripe for shaming, because it's exactly the point. The point of that norm is that people who follow that norm, who are in that norm group, are exactly the people that are going to be shamed by people who are like, no, we haven't agreed to that change in the norms, right? You are actually supposed to be an honest person, not a shameless person. So there's so much going on right now. It's chaos, honestly, with respect to changing norms. When there's chaos with changing norms, there is an uptick, if not an explosion of shame. Yeah. Yeah, well, this is off the top of my head, but I think it makes sense to think about the balance between the private and the public in societies. And when you're thinking about social change, there needs to be some kind of balance between those two. The domain of the private is a way in which you can't be shamed, because what you're doing with people who you're close to or intimate with, or you know trust you, is not something you would necessarily do with anybody. And now what's happened is the anybodies of the world are in that private domain, exposing it. And now your reputation, your career is affected because of something you happen to say in private that someone was able to eavesdrop on or leak. So basically our leaks, and this is with the irony of our free press, because our free press are a bunch of snoops. They're trying to dig into the private realm all the time. They're encouraging people to leak information, which would normally be in an insula area where you couldn't be shamed and they're shaming all sorts of people. And I think the MeToo movement, in fact, has brought us back to the 17th century. For stocks, that's why I use that notion. We have the stocks going all the time now. I don't think it's healthy for our society. And to the extent we continue to erode the private domain, it's an area where creativity can go on, transgressive experimentation can take place in miniature. Some of that stuff is truly loathsome. Others ends up being creative stuff that then filters out more broadly into the society. I think that's a correct. I think that's a commonality and that idea. But I think there's another thing. There is the idea of happiness. We haven't gotten to happiness. It was interesting that you brought it up as one of the best. I have to tell you the story. So I think I mentioned my father was born in the 19th century. So I mean in the 20th century, at the beginning of the 20th century. And he believed that if you did something well, you would be happy. And we now believe if you are happy, you will do something well. Focus has moved, which is part of the self-focus on our happiness. So in another round table, the discussion of happiness, and there's some wonderful books of how searching for happiness is made as miserable is really the theme. So not only are some of the changes in technology, which supports some of this, namely, I want to walk down, I live in the village. I walk down the streets and I'm a little old man. And a big towering person is walking toward me, reading their phone. And I have to say, excuse me, or he's going to run me down. And if we said, oh, well, we used to have people walk down the street reading books. That was not the case. People didn't walk down the street reading books. What? Making a joke. So I think there is a shift to this happiness, to this idea that the self deserves certain things. And I think it's in part why there's a decline in empathy and indeed a rise in narcissism. We have done, by the way, a round table on happiness. But thank you very much. We'd be happy to do it again. You promised me, you won't be careful. Oh, oh. Yes.