 Coming. I guess you know we're the amygdalaids and we play music about mind and brain and mental disorders. So it's fitting that we're in this particular place tonight. And the program is we're going to play a few songs and play about 45 minutes, 50 minutes or so. But before each sort of suite of songs, which would be one or two songs together on a particular topic, I'll just give you a brief kind of background about the intellectual background of the topic, the historical kind of place that the ideas come from, that the song is sort of based upon. And we're going to start off with a couple of songs about one of the deep problems in psychology, philosophy, neuroscience, psychiatry, all of the things that we know and care about, which is the mind-body problem. And you know this goes back to the ancient Greeks. We have ideas from the article at Delphi, for example, that the article said know thyself and a couple of millennia later, Descartes tried to solve this problem by concluding that the only thing he could know was himself with certainty. But you know this becomes, with Freud this becomes more questionable because then we have some issues about how much of what we are is conscious and how much is unconscious. So a couple of themes will be explored tonight through the music is consciousness and unconsciousness and the automaticity of certain aspects of who we are. And we're going to start with a couple of songs that are more in the area of consciousness, in particular with the first one is sort of a tribute to Descartes and he goes like this. I think so I am, I feel so I must be, sometimes I don't know, but it is to be me, I see your eyes, and they're staring at me, they're sharp as knives, oh what do we see, you can't see, you can't see inside of me, inside of me there's a blade only I can be. My soul has passion, it's trying to feel, searching for desire, nothing is real, my will is weak, it's not very free, nothing to get hung about, oh that's just the deal, you can't see inside of me, inside of me, that's a place only I can be, you can't see inside of me, inside of me that's a place only I can be. I think so I am, I feel so I must be, sometimes I don't know, it's to be me, I think so I am, I feel so I must be, sometimes I don't know, but it is to be me, you can't see, you can't see inside of me, inside of me that's a place only I can be, only I can be, only I can be, only I can be, I think so I can be, All right, thank you very much. Tyler, you'd say something for a minute while I switch guitars. Well, about the mind-body problem. Yes, what's the next song, Joe? I forgot. Mind-over matter. Oh, mind-over matter. So, yeah, yeah, we have to, well, we, of course, in culture, we think we have a lot of control over matter, and we do in a certain sort of way. But there's always a longing for more and more transcendence, and so we think of ourselves as immaterial beings as the same times that were materially embodied. And so this next song is a little bit about the, that kind of conflict between the material and the immaterial. Yeah, and it's about the, you know, the longing that you can have for someone who's not here and sort of delude yourself into thinking you can overcome space and time and bring that person together with you. Mind-over matter. There's something I'm trying to do. I guess it's only physics that keeps me apart from you. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. There's something I can't do. Mind-over matter. There's something I'm trying to do. I guess it's only physics that keeps me apart from you. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. Mind-over matter. We live in the automatic mind. Introspection opens in her eyes. It seems advanced yet hardly in control. Illusion of the will is comfort cold. Even though I realize it's still I feel so blind as I think about and can't live without the automatic mind. Walk, talk, blink, drink, think. You think, you think, you think. Even though I realize it's still I feel so blind as I think about and can't live without the book. Automatic mind. Alright, so let me just take that opportunity to introduce Tyler Tyler as a professor of environmental sciences in biology at NYU and he works on atmospheric and issues and carbon and things like that. Anything else you want to add about that Carl? That's good Joe. Okay. And Daniela Schiller is a assistant professor at Mount Sinai. She's a cognitive neuroscientist and she studies recovery from fear and processes in the brain that allow people to get over fears through various ways. Anything else? Yeah, no that's very good. And she's also an award-winning storyteller for the Moth Organization and other places. Amanda Thorpe is a world famous international musician. She hails from Derby, England. Darby I guess it's a doggy. Alright. And we're very fortunate to have her with us. Although she's not technically a scientist she does have a background in neuropsychology from University College London. So we counter as a part of the team. She's a fabulous musician with a separate solo career altogether with a bunch of CDs. You can find her online at demandathorpe.com. Okay. Okay, I'm Joe LaDue and I'm a professor of neuroscience at NYU. And now we're going to do a song called, what do we do? My mind's eye. So my mind's eye is another one about the way the mind plays tricks on us and does things that we don't always know too much about. And if I can remember where this thing goes this time we're being good shit. Okay. So take it away. Can't think. Can't hold a dramatic mind yet. If you look into my mind's eye. You would see the way that I cry. Deep inside. In my mind's eye. We had love. It was good. You were there. You understood. Everything. You can't always trust what you think you know. Can't trust what you believe. Sometimes your mind just puts on a show. It's simply disease. In my mind's eye you were mine. In my mind's eye. If you look into my mind's eye. You would see the way that I cry. Deep inside. In my mind's eye. You can't always trust what you think you know. Can't trust what you believe. Sometimes your mind just puts on a show. It's simply disease. Cancer. You were mine, my mind I was blind, I'm on time with blind I'm on time with blind, oh yeah I'm on time with blind Thank you Okay, nothing you remind, say something, tell me Yeah, map your mind, so automatic mind My mind's eyes, part of the problem is with our psyches But there's also a lot of joy being a human being as well Which I hope we're all smiling about every minute of the day So this is actually some of our favorite songs It's by Joe, it's called Map of Your Mind Okay, here we go Okay Okay Made a map of your mind I've charted my course I'm sailing deep inside Got the winds of force Got the heat of your heart Keep me from the cold Got the currents of will Take me to your soul I'm on a journey Out of God's day It's a war Out I knew I meant And excursion Of the eating side It's a trip Fueled by fire Made a map of your mind I've charted my course I'm sailing deep inside Got the winds of force Got the heat of your heart Keep me from the cold Got the currents of will Take me to your soul I'm just hoping ourselves I say those will be true That they'll take me straight to you Let the winds blow from God's sleep I'll go and I'll land My mind will be Got the heat of your heart Keep me from the cold Got the currents of will Take me to your soul Made a map of your mind Take me to your soul To your soul To your soul To your soul To your soul All right, thank you. Now we have a song called Trace, which is something that Well, people up here have studied Traces of memories, how they leave Permanent records in the neurons And now the DNA and the neurotransmitters And so I'm having the memory, it's really there So it's a connection between our daily lives And the discoveries about the neurological systems of our brains The song is called Trace And we're moving now into the memory part of the show So we do a couple songs about memory This will be in the first one You left to trace In my memory A permanent place In my synoptics Say the time He was all pain Time can erase Your place in my brain Days and nights They were so fine Months and years Maybe sublime Time stood still While it flew on by Time ended When you said goodbye You left to trace In my memory A permanent place In my synoptics Say the time He was all pain Time can erase Your place in my brain You left to trace Your place in my brain You won't erase Thank you For those who are sort of neuro-science aficionados That song was written over a dinner with Richard Morris and Yadine Doudai Which Richard challenged me to write a song about Yadine's theory of the dominant trace Just in case you know what that means This song is back to the other guitar This is another song about memory It's about glue and the way that emotions can glue together your memories and make them stronger You probably noticed that most of our neuroscience songs are love songs That's the way we tell the story of the brain We got us this on We got it We got it Turn that off for a second She's a good scientist I saw you leaving You saw me too You smiled at me That's what you do I tried to follow But you were gone Now I'm waiting Sitting home alone Keep thinking about You're smiling us Can't believe Your words were lost You made me happy So a very glad Can't forget There's times we had There must be something in my brain There must be something in my veins There must be some drama blue Keeps my memories stuck on you I saw you go I didn't know But you'd be there In the week or so It's so hard Realizing that I wasn't really aware you're right I dream about you Most every night I dream you're back I know that things are right I keep hoping My dreams will come true But I'll wake up Right next to you There must be something in my brain There must be something in my veins There must be some crime or glue Keeps my memories stuck on you I keep thinking about You're smiling us Can't believe Your words were lost You made me happy It's a very glad I can't forget There must be something in my brain There must be something in my veins There must be some crime or glue That keeps my memories stuck on you That keeps my memories stuck on you That keeps my memories stuck on you All right, now, so we've done memory And the mind-body problem, the unconscious And now we're turning to fear And we'll do a couple songs about that We'll do 90s dark But time is like close to end All right, so it's almost eight o'clock So if anybody wants us to keep playing Raise your hand if you want us to stop Okay, so I guess we have to stop So we'll play a couple more songs We'll play a couple more songs Sorry, go ahead My head is down My head is down My head is down My head is down When the night is dark I lose my fear When the night is dark Never shed a tear Then the daylight comes It scares me away The daylight comes And I have to fake When the night is dark I feel so free When the night is dark I feel a peace Then the daylight comes It scares me away When the daylight comes When I have to fake When the night is dark I come alive When the night is dark I begin to thrive When the daylight comes It scares me away When the daylight comes When I have to fake When the daylight comes It scares me away When the daylight comes When I have to fake When the night is dark We're going to close things out here with a song That ends where we started It's called the mind body problem And we're going to just solve that problem right here now We're going to close things out here with a song Ready for a little blues I've got a mind body problem I don't know what to do I've got a problem I don't know what to do My body wants you so My mind says no You said you'd always love me To me it'd be true You said you'd love me To me it'd be true Well now you're gone I'm sad and blue Well now you're back You want me again Now you're back You want me again If I relent I lose in the end I've got a mind body problem I don't know what to do I've got a problem I don't know what to do My body wants you so My mind says no No, no I even tried religion Get over you I even tried religion To get over you My body's not you so Oh, oh, oh They've got me trembling and shaking Oh, I dreamt got a problem I don't know what to do I can't get over I'm trembling and shaking He's got a problem I can't get over you Oh, yeah, baby I'm going insane I've got a mind body problem I don't know what to do I've got a problem I don't know what to do My body wants you so My mind says no Okay, thank you and good night Thanks, you've been great Thanks for coming out here tonight Enjoy the conference