 I I Where is your work primarily on? I mean, you know, that is the mystery. It's on Bible. So I'm not a citizen of religion. So, you know... Is this... Okay, yeah, stop. Hold on. Yeah, I'm... as soon as I turn my head, it's kind of... Yeah. Can we move it? I'm going to go up the road. I'm going to go up the road. Yeah, there we go. I can see sign up. I'm going to go up the road. I'm going to go up the road. Okay. Yep, a bit of a pinch. Yeah, that's my friend. I'm going to go up the road. Ask him, he'll meet you. I'm an opportunity tech right now. We have a new biomedical research institute. So, it looks like it's human choice behavior. You know, the neuroscience behind the behaviors that we express in making choices will help us represent problems that can help evaluate that in the next decade. That's right. Yep. Yeah. Okay. So, further down the line, some of the training you're about is this. I've done work with the volunteer for training. I've done the work with the volunteer for training. We use different kinds of analogies where we can measure brain activity while people are making choices. Now, is this connected to neural networks at all? Yep. So, actual lens versus the computational lens? Yeah. Actual neural networks versus the McOne. Yeah. And... Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. We're going to get started. Okay. Thanks. We're going to get started now. My name is Rob Penzer. I'm the associate director of the Helix Center. I have a few announcements of upcoming programs before we get to today's John Templeton Foundation sponsored Roundtable. Next, I'm sorry, Saturday, May 2nd. We have trauma and its after effects. It will be a two-part series and the first part is on war and genocide. We have a panelist, Eva Weil, and journalist Phil Zabriski. On Saturday, May 16th, humans and animals, continuities and discontinuities. With mind-body investigator, Theodore Diamond Jr., animal cognitive scientist Irene Pepperberg and Diana Reese and others. I also wanted to alert you to the upcoming Helix Center annual benefit dinner, which will take place Friday evening, May 8th. Information and tickets are available through the Helix Center website at www.helixcenter.org. Please follow us on Facebook and Twitter and tweet generously. Today's Roundtable, the Changing Nature of Free Will. There are more extensive biographies than the introduction I'll provide. They're on your handouts and also on the website. But as I introduce each of the participants, if he or she can raise your hand, the audience will identify you. Akhil Bill-Grami is the Sydney Morgan Besser Professor of Philosophy at Columbia University. His main areas of research are philosophy of mind and language, technology and political philosophy. He's the author of three books, Belief and Meaning, Self-Knowledge and Resentment, and Secularism, Identity and Enchantment. He is currently writing a book on the Nature of Value, Practical Reason and Agency. Louis Cabra is the Pagnelli Bull Professor of Economics and International Business at NYU's Stern School of Business. His research focuses on the dynamics of firm competition, both from the antitrust and from the strategy perspectives. His research topics include reputation, learning, network effects, sunk costs, innovation, strategic risk choice. In addition to numerous journal articles, he is the author of Introduction to Industrial Organization. Brigida Kao is a professor of New Testament at Union Theological Seminary in New York and Associate Professor at the Religion Department at Columbia. A biblical scholar with strong interdisciplinary and ecological leanings, a major focus of her recent work has been between New Testament and Roman Empire, especially with a guard to the letters of Paul. He is the author of numerous articles and several books, including Galatians Reimagined, Reading with the Eyes of the Vanquisht. Ken Kishida is a research scientist in the Computational Psychiatry Unit at the Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute. He investigates neurobiological processes underlying human choice behavior using computational approaches paired with measurements of behavior and associated neural activity. Such experiments designed to expose how the brain encodes computations important for adaptive choice behavior. Simon Koshan is Professor Emeritus and Senior Research Scientist in the Mathematics Department of Princeton University, a recipient of the Frank Nelson Cole Prize in Number Theory of the American Mathematical Society, his interest lie in mathematical logic, number theory, and quantum mechanics. His work on the foundation of quantum mechanics includes the paper with Ernest Specker, I'm sorry, Specker, on the Koshan Specker Paradox, and with John Conway on the free screen and now to our roundtable. Alright, well, I have the confess usually when I talk about science with other neuroscientists, not very often with philosophers or theologians. I know why myself and folks I tell the rest of us here are interested in the problem or what value you guys have placed on this idea. I don't work exactly on free-wearing topics that you've heard just before. Did that include free-wearing? A lot of different things, not this. I think it's a fascinating topic, one that I'm interested in and I've been reading mostly about, and I don't do a lot of research on. Just to get things started, I mean personally I don't think that free will is a proposition that can be proven or disproven in a way that is a free will. If free will primarily as an axiom, if there is no free will, then what's my identity? Everything that I do that I think is just the result of the temporal events or it's totally conditioned by particles or whatever the negation of free will is. Then I would have no identity and I cannot imagine a world where I wouldn't be I. I like to think of free will as an axiom, I think it can be studied, maybe it can be falsified in some way, but I'd rather think about it as an axiom rather than a proposition that we can prove or disprove. Just an idea. So I mean, unless someone's jumping, I'll add a bit to that. So when I've thought about this in the past, before I really pursued a role in science, trying to answer these kinds of questions, in that transition, I've found that actually the idea of free will, it has this kind of use as a belief to frame how we do think about ourselves, and how the choices we make have an impact. But from a scientific perspective, I actually find that it's very challenging to use that idea to go in and study the thing that it's trying to capture it. When you get into discussions of free will or consciousness, a lot of it boils down to an hour of trying for everyone involved to define and talk about it. When we're talking about free will, to me it seems like what it is is we're interested in how humans make choices, right, the choice behaviors that we see. We want to explain when we execute certain actions, it has some repercussions. Could we have done something different, heavy, been that moment again? And we want to try to explain that. So to me it seems like it's a useful idea, only to kind of fill in a gap where we haven't really explored it very much. And so as a neuroscientist I've been interested in studying choice behavior from a biological standpoint and trying to understand what does lead to the varieties of choice that we express. So I wouldn't say that it's free, there's really nothing free about what humans or any other biological organism does. Everything comes at a cost. We can't go on forever without eating or sleeping or breathing. And so there's a real constraints on the kinds of choices that we can make and how we can navigate the world. On the other hand, as humans we seem to gain some control over the environment so that we can have these luxuries. We can sit in a room and talk about things rather than be out hunting and gathering our resources and shelters, right. And so we get this kind of luxury and that expands to lots of other domains where we create some freedom from our past, I guess. So let me just ask you something. Would you agree with the proposition that the only reason why we cannot predict the behavior of a certain agent, be it human or non-human, is lack of precision in measurement, that one day if we measure neurologically with sufficient accuracy, every single neuron of the human brain, we're able to model and predict behavior? In some ways we do predict behavior. If I want to make you feel bad, I'll insult you, right, or I'll hack you physically, right. And that will have very big differences on how you're going to act with me. I have kids and so when I want them to do certain strategies that I could use to interact with them and others that won't be very effective. From a scientific standpoint, you can put people or pigeons into a Skinner box where they can make choices and you can set up the reward, schedule the hovers in such a way that they will act actually quite predictably. In some sense it's in probabilistic terms, right, decision, decision, it is not perfect. It's probabilistic, as he said, in rightly so. Is that error term in your models? Is that due to measurement error or is it due to something that's inherent to the model that you model? I think it's the big philosophical or whatever question about free will. Is it all a matter of measurement? The only reason why I cannot predict exactly what you're the rat or human subject is going to do is that I'm not measuring carefully enough. Or is there any fundamental, if you will, of uncertainty which cannot be properly predicted? So let me interject here. So part of that question is, is the uncertainty our knowledge of what's going on as philosophers say epistemic? Well, is there an underlying uncertainty here? So I'm a mathematician and might ask why I'm here altogether. But about eight years ago I proved a result together with John Conway at Princeton, which is a refinement of a much older theorem going back with Anchbeck as Swiss mathematician, almost 50 years. And the question there is the underlying question is not directly about the question of determinism in the universe. Is the universe strictly deterministic in a quite precise way that classical physics in seismic Newton has said that if you know the state of the... never mind, no. If the state of the universe is whatever it is at a given time, classical physics tells you the state of the universe, both at any other time, both in the future and the past, is totally determined. So that was started a century by Isaac Newton in his system at the moment. And that brings in an old philosophical question that goes back over 2000 years between the Stoics and Epicurus and the Romans with Lucretius and Cicero. And the more modern version is what Hume started and Hobbes in the 18th century, and it's what's called compatibilism by philosophers, is free will compatible with such a deterministic picture of the universe. So the contribution that these theorems make that I was talking about is to say that it's pointless to even talk about that because modern physics in the form of quantum mechanics gives rise to certain experiments, which shows that... So quantum mechanics itself, if you accept it, says that even if you're nicely the state as much as you can, what's called a pure state, at the present time for a closed system, like a particle or several, then the future, for the future, you can only talk about probabilities for that. And if you accept quantum mechanics, that's not epistemological. It's not our knowledge. It's just an ontological fact that you cannot give that there are probabilities only that you can give. What the theorem that I'm talking about says is, see, people didn't like that point of view. Even the founders of quantum mechanics, like Schrodinger and Einstein, really were not very happy with this whole idea of there being an inherent probability. And various people have tried to get back to a classical picture which reproduces the picture, but says that these are probabilities, if you knew the underlying states, would be just a lack of knowledge of the underlying hidden variables. So an example of biology is we have probabilities attached to inherited traits, like blue eyes and brown eyes. One uses these probabilities, but men will introduce a sort of hidden variable, namely a jigine, which nobody knew existed at that time. But it explains the process of recessive and dominant factors. It explains the probabilities very well, and eventually they were actually found as molecules. So people who believe in such hidden variables feel that they might try to explain the probabilities of quantum mechanics in the same way. This theorem, I'm not going to make a distinction between of spacer myself and then somewhat improved on myself. It says that you can't put quantum mechanics. If you try to give a classical explanation of certain experiments that we came up with, you'll run into a contradiction. If you actually want to say what the future state is, I can explain this in more detail if people want later. But there's just a series of 40 experiments in this which quantum mechanics gives probabilities for the outcomes. But if you try to give, say this is the outcome to this, you simply run into mathematical contradiction. So that's what the theorem is about. The whole argument between what are called compatibilists and those who believe compatibilism and free will are, in fact, they are not compatible. That's to say that free will and determinism are incompatible, the incompatible list. That argument is an old fashioned argument which now since quantum mechanics for almost 100 years is simply out of date. One doesn't have to talk about this compatibilism because quantum mechanics is a pro-intontologically probabilistic theory. It says we will never get back to a classical kind of deterministic universe. The question broadly is whether those who believe in free will will find comfort in the fact that we move from some level of certainty to predictions that are merely probabilistic. They might say that the real threat to free will is that you should see it as that human agency is susceptible to prediction, even if the prediction is demoted to a probabilistic prediction for the reasons that you and others have established. So, here are two questions that seem to suggest that there's a more principled issue about freedom than one of whether the system, the school system is to be seen in probabilistic terms or something more close to certainty. One is to raise the question, you see, if it is the case that all laws, even in Newton's mechanics, laws presumably come with a heterosperivus clauses with all things being equal clauses, in Latin it's called cadaisperivus clauses, that is you hold certain things steady. So, you can predict so long in certain conditions are met. So, there's a clause which says it says it were looking out for things that allow for exceptions and saying those mustn't arise, those conditions mustn't arise. Now the trouble with human behavior is that if you were tempted to say that certain intentions and choices and preferences, if one would tend to say that their laws are the probabilistic or more definite forms of law, if one would tend to say their laws would say if you've made certain choices or had certain preferences, you would act in such and such way. So, the trouble is when we try and say what has to be in a cadaisperivus clause, it's just about everything. I mean if I say if I believe that that water will quench my thirst, and so I predict that I will, if I have that thirst and that belief, I will drink that water, that could go, that prediction could be falsified by just about anything, right? Why am I being too lazy to pick it up? Why am I being too busy talking to pick it up? Why am I preferring orange juice to drinking that? It could be just about anything. So, what has to be held steady? When one says all things been equal, I would drink that water if I have that visit. We have no ex-anti hold over all that has to be held steady. But if you compare what has to be held steady, say in the law of falling bodies in Newton, you can ex-anti state in a very general way what has to be held steady. And that's part of the problem that you were raising. We have no, all the, all things being equal clauses as it were, have to come exposed. We can't ex-anti say what has to be held steady. I think that's part of the problem. Isn't that the promise of neuroscience that we will be able to control that? I mean, if you get down to the really nitty-gritty of neurological activity that eventually, if you measure sufficiently well, you should be able to control for all of those conditions. You know, your past behavior, your state of, the state of the world could also be the state of your mind measured in some precise way. Right. You could do that by changing the subject. That is, you couldn't do it with the vocabulary of orange juice, thirst, and so on. You'd have to do it with the vocabulary of neurophysiological states. Right. So in a sense, you can do that by a reductive change of the subject. Right. You can't do it with the vocabulary of beliefs, desires, preferences, etc. You can talk about brain states. And then the question arises, well, we wanted a prediction with this vocabulary. You've given us a prediction in a different vocabulary, and that really is, in a way, the mind-minded problem. And it seems like some of the resistance to that change in vocabulary. It's not the vocabulary that we use day to day. Right. And the value, from what I understand, about free will. We're not so concerned about whether or not our pet dog has free will. We care about whether or not other humans have free will. Because when they do, they either don't accept or that we want to support. We want to assign them credit or not. And there's, I think, good evidence that this is something that's very important to our species. It's something that's evolved in how we process information about others. It's how we organize in small groups, but then also bigger structures. And so if you change the vocabulary to a biological one or a neurophysiological one, there's a worry that then the whole social structure, which is built on this other language, will collapse. And it's actually what's going to happen with the exceptions based on what we understand from medicine and neurobiology. Right. So whether it's legal or whether it's interpersonal, if a person has a particular psychiatric condition and it causes them to act in certain ways, treated or untreated, we don't treat them the same way as a society, as someone who does not have that condition. Right. And that's true in many cases. So just because you can make it doesn't seem to remove agency. It doesn't seem to remove control. In fact, actually, I think it actually enhances it and provides more control as we start to understand where these constraints come from. From our biology, our environment, the interactions we have. Once we recognize that they are constraints, we could do things as a society. We can make choices to remove them, right, to make things more equal, a more level playing field. And so in some sense, by changing the language, learning what is or is not predictable, we're actually gaining more control. So wait, so that makes it sound as if the more determined we are and the more knowledge we have of the determining factors, the more free we are. As we come to understand that, so I'm not sure if you're making, but it says though, as we learn about it, we become determined. Right. So I guess what I'm saying is that there are forces that we're completely unaware of in our biology and in our environment that have impact on the way we make decisions. Right now. But I thought your point was that once we come to know more about those determining factors, we actually get a lot of control and therefore are more free. Yes. So there's nothing more free is different from completely free. More control, more choice. There's a pair of paradox in that, isn't it? But usually we thought agency was threatened by determinism and you're suggesting agency is enhanced by determinism so long as knowledge of the determinants. So we're going from determinism to completely free will or some version of compatibleism. That is not the language that I actually find useful to talk about these things. From the work that I do and the way that I approach these problems, I can make observations, I can control certain experimental settings and I can make measurements and generate models for what I might expect to be the future. So generating essentially scientific beliefs. When we talk about free will and when we get really heated debates over that, what we're actually talking about is human behavior. When we see others, so in this space of trying to explain human behavior, we can learn more about what is guiding that. I agree with you that if we know more about what is determining our behavior, we do in a sense become more liberated because we know what the knowledge of the knowledge of necessity is actually a liberating thing. But here's the interesting, it's really very fast to the paradox, which is that what you say is absolutely right. The more we find out about, so if I'm angry and I've figured out what exactly the well springs of my anger are, I have no point in anger. That's the point that Spinozo is making. But here's the fascinating thing, that is true only if it is piecemeal. If it's piecemeal, there is something which when it's small, my anger or some particular thing, one thing or the other, but if one had nothing but the perspective of seeing oneself, say as a psychoanalysts, sees one, just in a detached way, if one made that thing comprehensive, we would have no agency. So the very thing which when it's small is liberating, in just the way you describe, if you just blow it up to say make it a comprehensive thing saying, well, we can just see all our behaviors, that's present and future, that's the end of agency. So from a biological perspective, an organism has physical boundaries, but that's different from, I think, the agency that you're talking about, or the sense of it. I interact with people in exchange information either consciously, but also quite implicitly. Just being in a room full of folks or being in a conversation, your brain is processing this information in ways that's guiding how you're going to behave, in ways that you're not necessarily aware of. And so for an observer of an agent in that context, our readout of their agency is really based on their behavior. It always comes back to one brain or one system looking at another system and trying to determine who is the agent. The hard question is what goes on when one is observing oneself. And what I was, of course, if you observe and study yourself, you will get more control of yourself in the future. But if you do nothing, if you have no other point of view on yourself, but that of detached observation, then you've gotten rid of agents. So there must be some other perspective you have on yourself over and above a detached study of yourself. That is what everyone means by freedom. Sure. I mean, I think... Yeah, don't do your way. Well, it's quite fascinating to listen to all that and trying to translate it into the way which I am working. And I am just noticing that the same problems, but in a different key, have been the technology throughout the centuries. And it is so interesting. And this is a reason why I really thought I should come here and just listen to you and see where we are in that. And so this big kind of paradoxical juxtaposition between determinism on the one hand, so things are determined. And in theology, of course, we say that is this supreme being called God, the deity that has created everything and has... is kind of sovereign. I mean, has sovereignty over things that happen. So that is the kind of person who destines us or destines us or kind of... is the kind of determinating force. And then on the other hand, of course, we also need free will, you know, because if everything is already set by God, what the hell are we doing and how come that there is a judgment or that there is repentance, that we can change, that there is conversion. And all these things that is this constant appeal to our moral agency or kind of spiritual agency to change who we are. And I think I have never worked on free will because I always thought this is kind of a dead end discussion. Because theologians have kind of constantly been in battle about that. I mean, you know, you have two positions. One kind of camp says, and they are often well-the-hiratics. They said that is free will. Even after the fall of Adam and Eve in paradise, you still can do good. And then there is the other position that says, no, we cannot do good. And when you were talking, I just about my decisions and thinking about what I am doing. I just was kind of thinking of Paul who said, I'm such a miserable being because I constantly do what I not want. You know, I know what is good. I know what I want to do. But how come that I constantly do the opposite? You know, my freedom is restricted and why is my freedom restricted? And then there is this big term sin. I'm in bondage. I see the things I would like to do, but I don't do them because the novel law is at work in my limbs, in my hands. Then what my mind tells me. So, and then Paul says, you know, but there is a way out of that. And here is the question, how kind of theologians are asking them, where are we going with that? What is at stake in this debate? Is at stake, are you going to eat eggs or bacon for breakfast? Or is this choice or is something else at stake? Can we even keep the world in a state that is deliverable, for example? Or are we kind of doomed to turn it into hell? I think this is the theological question. So, do we have the agency to do good? Or are we all under the spell of evil? And this is why I'm so interested in listening to neuroscience and to quantum mechanics. I think that all is this kind of, on the one hand, we are far more determined than we think we are. And on the other hand, there is a space of freedom. I mean, this is what I hear you to say. And do I hear you wrong? I mean, I think it's interesting when we ask the question of this force, this pushing this forward. And it also speaks, I think, where is agency? So, agency, free will. These are ideas that seem to be very useful to us as human beings. It's something that we do care a lot about. We spend a lot of cycles thinking about. From a biological perspective, there is a lot at stake. It's a survival of our species. And that's always been the case. And that's true for any species on this planet. It's always been about the survival of the species. And so, there are things that will promote the survival and things that will demote that. And evolution by natural selection would say that basically you, that which survives when. So, there's no really other introduction on it. Those ideas or those things that support the survival of the species on to the next stage and the next generation are fit. And so, I'd actually propose a compromise between what some popular scientists view on religion and what religion's role has been for humanity is that there has, it's been a useful idea. It helps organize our day-to-day where we fit in the world. If it wasn't useful to us as a species, it would have been dropped long ago, right? And we would have all passed that. We haven't done that. We hang on to these ideas of being an agent or having free will or all kinds of narratives. And science is its own narrative based on experimentation and empirical thought. So, you think that's also true for free will as an instrument for all agencies that's necessary for living in society? I think it's something that we hang on to as a species because it is useful. At some point it occurred to me personally, well, what if I didn't have free will? Well, college student knows I was thinking, well, either I have free will or I don't. Well, what if I don't? Well, whether I do or don't, my life doesn't really change. I can't really change my behavior in any other way, right? So, the choices I make or the choices I make, I'm chasing some value for every choice and it's kind of letting go of that idea and looking to other ways to explain my behavior or others' behavior became more interesting. But there's all kinds of ideas that I think that do carry some value to us. And where that comes from, where that value comes from, that's an open question, I think. I mean, I think it's hard to deny what you're saying, but I'm wondering if the term useful is the right term. That is, all my instincts are to say that there's something more lofty about the norm, which says, we ought not to shape the concept of human freedom. Not that it's just that it's useful, but we ought not. So, I have a loftier sense of the norm than the norms of utility. One way to ask the question which your work establishes that there is a notion of free. There's a falsity about determinism in the way you've moved from returning mechanics to contemporary physics. One thing we might ask is, what is the location for the idea of norms or the usefulness of the notion of agency, which is partly what you were saying too? So, here's a very simple question. Suppose you did something, suppose X did something very harmful, because it's a very delightful sake, or for a personal gain or something like that. And somebody else say, why? Did the same harmful thing, because he was forced to do it, say physically forced, or somebody put a machine gun to his head and said, do it, or shoot you. So, X and Y do exactly the same thing. It's a bad thing. So, does it, because he wants to do it, wants to gain from it, etc. Why does it, because somebody's just forced him to do it, say physically? Now, we will never give up the distinction between these two people. However much we find out about the brain, whatever we find out, all the things that, you know, these current, you know, is it Libé? How do you pronounce this name? Libé? Libé? Others have done. Let's see. They're all right. Right? All of its neuroscience establishes this. Will we ever give up the distinction between X and Y? That's an, I think that's an empirical question, right? That's something so, so, in parable in the sense that... No, I'm suggesting, we ought not to give up the distinction. So, I'm denying it's an empirical question. We should never, we should not give up. We should say somebody was forced to do it, should be treated differently from somebody who did it, say... So, just for the very idea, I do agree with you. I also share that belief that we ought not abandon that distinction. But when I say that it's empirical, say, for simplicity's sake, there's two halves of the population. One half the population believes that we should remove that distinction, and they have things that we ought not. And then there's changes in the environment that there's grand scale forces in the environment that change whether it's a side level or... Why not? Holding one belief or the other is beneficial to the species. Then it'll be determined at that point in time, basically wins out. So, it's kind of a very abstract idea of whether or not we should maintain this distinction about responsibility for actions. But if it's not a useful idea that promotes the genes that we carry, then I would say that it's empirical in that sense, that evolutionary forces can kind of going forward. In time, we'll determine that for us. Now, to go back to... I do agree with you that we ought not lose that distinction. And I think part of that is it's come from our past that there might have been a period in time where we couldn't make that distinction. In this case, in the course of so, we're not really clear who's actually the causative agent, whether it's a person or the person that's been manipulated. And we struggle with assigning that. First of all, when you say species, you mean the human species? But what about all the part of us that is very similar in terms of behavior to animals? What do you say to that? And are you saying that free will is a property of being part of the human species? Only in a sense that humans care about it. It's a belief or it's an idea that humans discuss and debate over. There's actually... from what I killed said becomes more immoral. What you said has a moral connotation. And that's also something that the human species uniquely cares about. So these are ideas that are very important to us. And they're probably important to us who are a very good reason. And there's a reason that we don't want to let go of them. Because when we do the structure of our society, it would likely fall apart. It would just be very different. We wouldn't be able to do it anymore. It's part of how we identify ourselves as being human. I think what Simon said, you would not... your proposal, your proposition, doesn't own humans. Well, we're talking... yes. So we're talking about determinism and then we have to talk about free will. Now my own feeling is that compatibilism really doesn't make a lot of sense. That if things are determinant totally, and that applies to the... exactly to the situation where it's no different than being coerced from the outside, is that if everything is determined, you can't make that distinction between the two cases that you talked about. So I really think that question is so. Let me make a point here about... Is it really possible to get rid of determinism in an absolute way? See, these theorems that I was talking about, they're saying that a classical theory, which is deterministic, that doesn't hold water anymore because of say these experiments, how is it... these 40 experiments. But you see, a classical theory is not simply telling... a scientific theory is not history. It tells you... it gives you general laws and tells you whatever the state is, it'll tell you what happens afterwards. And if it's classical, it'll tell you in a deterministic theory. If I lift this up, say, nine feet, I want to know that if I take three-quarters of second to four, and that's not magic, it just follows a well-known law that if you remember your high school physics, it's that the height, the S, is equal to 16 t squared, where it's in feet in seconds. And if I put in for the height of nine feet, then I get nine over 16 and it's... now, to know that is interesting, perhaps, but that's not what scientific theories are about. I also want to know if I lift it up 16 feet, then it's going to take a full second by using the... it's the law and how that works under different conditions that tells me this. And this theorem I was talking about, that classical physics doesn't work, is of this type. You have to know that no matter what possibility, suppose somebody says, yes, well, I'll tell you, and one of these 40... experiments, and I'll be right, perhaps. But I said, no, you have to tell us in all of these. Now, that's what physics to predict is supposed to predict different things. But suppose somebody says, I'm not interested in scientific theories, I believe in a being who's prescient. It doesn't have to be omnipotent, but he has to be present. He has to tell you what happens in the future. And I say, well, this experiment says you won't be able to predict. He says, no, this being doesn't have to predict everything. He'll tell you that you have to do this thing in particular, this experiment, and that experiment, I'll tell you what it is. So, you see, this theorem doesn't act against a prescient being. Who tells you what the actual trajectory of the world is. Scientific theories don't tell you the actual trajectory. They tell you the possible trajectory starting from any particular state. And that's very different. See, so this theorem that I was talking about can't argue directly against this kind of prescience. In order to do that, I would have to put in a little bit of my own free will, namely these 40 experiments correspond to one of 40 buttons I pick. You have to give me you know, you have to give me the free will to press one of these 40 buttons, so some electromagnet changes in the direction. And then with that, even a prescient person cannot predict all the 40. All he got into a mathematical contradiction. See, there is no absolute proof that that determinism doesn't work. Let me give you a more homely example. You know, when I was young, I was growing up in England. I loved movies, and I went to once each week. And one day I saw a movie I really liked, Cassablanca. I think you all know the movie. And at the movie Rick, I'm free Bogart, has two letters of transit for getting out of Cassablanca to the free world. And there are three people there, Ingrid Bergman, the love of his life, and her husband, who's a freedom fighter, the question that Humphrey Bogart has to make answers, which one of the two is he going to give the transit? So, I mean, I didn't know which one he was going to choose. It really was a question. And of course we know he does the noble thing. I'm not giving anything away at this point. And he allows the Ingrid Bergman, the husband, to leave. He joins the free French with Claude Rains, the Vichy police captain, who they now join the free French at the beginning of a beautiful friendship. So that's the story. By the way, afterwards, it really was a free world decision because the script writers couldn't decide which way to end and then finally decided on this. What I want to say is this, I like the movie so much. I went to see it next week with a friend of mine. He had never seen it. And he had the same thing. Humphrey Bogart has a free world decision, right? He didn't have a free world decision. This was the second showing. So he couldn't, he had to make that. Now my point is this. You know, here's the universe. And you know, there's a famous mathematician at the Institute for Advanced Study and aside from his work in logic, he was a privateer also, he was a friend of Einstein, and in his usual quirky way, he found a solution to the relativistic equations, which is a cycle that is to say the universe completely repeats itself. Now that's a possibility then. So here's the universe. Maybe there is free well and maybe not. But in the second showing, there cannot be any free will, right? So this sort of logical possibility shows you cannot get away with proving that, you know, you cannot get away from proving that determinism, you know, that determinism can't work. This shows that, you know, that in the second showing, everything is totally determined because it happened the same way as this, just like in the movie, right? So you have to get, it's a little like solipsism. There is no absolute plotical proof that says that you want just a figment of my imagination. You know, you try to surprise me and this and that, but of course you will happen and we know there is such a model because when I go to bed at night, I dream and these people are figments of my imagination, do surprise me and so on. So it is a fact that it could be the solipsism, it's ridiculous, but it's a logical possibility. So determinism is exactly the same thing by the second showing. It's, in my opinion, ridiculous. If you ask a child of four or five whether they have free will, and I've tried this, and they say, well, of course I have free will. You have to be sophisticated and talk about things like determinism, either from a religious or scientific point of view, to start believing that we aren't all robots and everything is determined. So my point is that there is no absolute proof of either the determinism doesn't work or that solipsism, for that matter, doesn't work. We have to solve free will and that's the same thing with free will. So actually I ties in a little bit with what I said earlier that I like to think of free will as something that's not falsifiable in a scientific way. And therefore there's a sense in which it's more of an axiom than my point is really opposite. You have, there is no way of establishing free will absolutely. Oh, I agree with that. And like in this theorem we have a little bit of free will of pressing one of these forty buttons, and now I can say that the whole world is spontaneous, you know, that actions of particles are spontaneous in this sense, given this theorem in quantum mechanics. But you have to, there's no absolute proof. You have to put in a little, you know, if somebody says, look, you're assuming free will to prove it, well I can say, look, you know, it's like the fisherman, he puts in a minnow and catches a trout and someone there, so you put the fish in, what have you done? You have to assume a little bit of free will and then the whole world becomes, you know, an arena for free will, or even of particles. But you know, it has to become simply an axiom the free will exists because there's no way of proving it absolutely. I mean, may I go back to what Ken said before, the issue of survival of species. And you kind of made it look pretty easy. I mean, you know, we do ourselves, our survival of survival, but we don't. What if we are addicted? And we know the kind of, the kind of the brain chemistry of addiction is an interesting thing. What if we are addicted through our whatever, what happens in our brain if we like something that actually destroys us? So isn't that a step forward in the debate on free will or not? I mean, you know, the kind of, we are, you know, the way we live is that really conducive to survival. I mean, in economy, in well, in ecology and all in politics, in all respect. I mean, so are we, and then, you know, here's again where the theology comes in because, you know, these people, and I'm just realizing it while listening to our debate here, these people have been kind of brutally realistic saying, you know, we have the bondage of free will. I mean, this was one of the big terms in the 16th century. The bondage of free will versus free will. So that is Erasmus of Rotterdam versus Martin Luther. So they kind of, in such a sense, that is not such a thing as free will. Only theoretically, but practically, we are kind of, we are in, in prison, in cause by things we can't control really. And that is what I would call really a translation. We are addicted to doing exactly what destroys us. So how do we deal with that? Yes, so, so, so, you know, addiction from the A. But there are certain ideas that we are compelled to. So, so, so, so, so, if we all held the exact same idea, and it was the wrong idea, that would be detrimental to our species, right? Whether it was an idea or a behavior, or something, they were expressing. But the wonderful thing about any species is its diversity, right? And that's really what protects, as we've talked about, any species is its diversity, right? And that's really what protects a species for, for future events, city. And so, our biology sets up for us, and that's not just expressed in and how tall we are, or hair color, or all these other features. But it also expresses itself in our brain structure, which gives rise to our beliefs and our behaviors. Having that diversity is really important for any species. And so, having this debate and having ideas kind of develop is probably the thing we want to do. We don't want to actually settle on the wrong answer, for sure, since we don't know where we're going to find something future. But addiction to fossil fuel may have a gene. It may. But you know, what I think is, is when I was saying that it may be a norm, a moral norm, that we don't cease to see ourselves as agents with freedom, even in the face, even if determinism were established and neuroscience. I was really giving a secular version of many of the things you were saying when you talked about good and evil and so on. So, I mean, that is certainly how a lot of people think of it in theological terms. But you can also just think of it in secular terms and talk of just normative and moral and so on. So, I think we are both saying the same things in dramatically different idioms. But you know, that suggests, and I think you want to say it too partly, when you say it's just an axiom, it's not the sort of thing that you will allow to be refuted by this thing. And I'm suggesting that the disallowing is a normative stance, a moral stance. So, there seems to be some convergence on this, and even you agree, you talk of it in terms of usefulness, which I've some qualm about, but that's a matter of detail. So, here's a question which I want to bring in on this. The kinds of things you were talking about discusses free will at a level of abstraction, whereas what has been surfing here is that it's a normative notion as well. So, maybe we should just say it's an ambiguous notion. I absolutely agree with that. Free will is just an ambiguous notion. So, let's say freedom, which is studied as a purely metaphysical thing in terms of scientific laws, what interpretation we give to them, and so on. That's freedom in its purest most metaphysic. Let's give another to what has emerged as freedom as a normative stance. Let's call it freedom. Right. And that freedom is the notion that everybody's always been interested in. Right. Has always been interested in. So, I would call it choice behavior. I mean, I think that's when we talk about free will. I don't care. Call it X. Call it X. It doesn't call it anything you like. The point is it's just two different notions. So, my hesitation to freedom versus free will is that first of all, freedom, I wouldn't know where to start with to go looking for what to observe, what to measure there, or how to even think about that. With free will it has only because we all know that phrase. Right. But if, you know, a simplistic point, you know, the word free has, you know, six or seven definitions. The word will has a dozen. You multiply those together. I mean, you're getting a whole variety of things that it could possibly mean. So, it is absolutely ambiguous and whether it's an axiom or eye. I think I would actually put as a belief. It's not as useful to me for what I want to do with whatever it is that we're talking about. To do anything with. What I find interesting is that when we talk about free will, we're not talking about the behavior of other organisms, except for when the conversation kind of diverges. We're talking about people. Right. We're talking about human behavior and how do we make judgments over that behavior? How do we use, you know, and so, you know, perhaps freedom might be something useful to go in that direction and define it specifically. But I think whatever that is, it was, for me, it was back down to how do humans behave? Where do those choices come from? Okay. But do we have a concession from a neuroscientist? That's what you are right. So, do we have a concession from a neuroscientist that all the delivering search on freedom makes no difference to freedom? I'm not sure what freedom is, honestly. If I'm going to commit to something, I would want to know. You know what freedom is. I got the notion from your remarks about usefulness and so on with some modifications. I study human choice behavior. Right. So, so, so, so, so, you talked about the usefulness of a certain concept which we don't. So, I'm talking about a generic concept or the idea. So, I'm talking about what you're talking about. So, you know what I'm talking about. I guess so. Let's go with it. So, so, so, do we have a concession from somebody who researches a neuroscientist that whatever the deliverances of your research are, they leave completely untouched. This other thing, call it whatever you like, but you know about it because you just raised this concept. You named it. And I would not conceive as far as the way I understanding what you're saying. Neuroscience research and trying to understand how the brain works and how it gives rise to human behavior. There's a lot of things on which we could observe them. In a lot of the behaviors we observe in humans are expressions of the beliefs that we carry with us. Right. So, I'm trying to gather what you might mean by freedom or some other concept, whether it's free will or something else. And then the spaces where we can agree and do something productive as two agents. But when we're talking about beliefs, whatever kind of belief that might be. That is an area that's not as well explored in neuroscience as a visual system or how we smell things in the world, but it's a real thing. And so, it's a big problem in the medical industry with a placebo effect. Where simply the idea can actually have an impact on your nervous system. And it's not just compliant behavior, but you actually see physiological changes due to the suggestion that this pill is going to help you. So, the impact that beliefs have on human nervous systems is very real. It's something that we don't understand completely, but it's something that should be researched more. Can you change? So, just to try to bring the two things together. Do you agree that as neuroscience improves its methods, its measurement techniques, and so forth, that there will always be a irreducible degree of unpredictability of human behavior? Or that it's purely a matter of measurement? If there is an irreducible level of unpredictability, we can call that a tridentism, the fact that even given all the addictions, even given all the neurological conditions that people have, even given all the beliefs as you want to define them, of choice in humans, which is inherent to that human for one reason or another, and I'm not going to go into quantum mechanics at this point, but there's an irreducible level of prediction that we can agree to call that what everyone called, X. It seems to me that what we're entering here with this is the intractable mind-broughtty problem in general. I mean, this is a sort of special case having to do with beliefs and free will and so on, and the question is, what is the neurology, the neuroscience that's to do with the brain? How does that connect up with the mind? My own feeling at the moment is that it's got interesting things to say, but it does not cross that chasm. I mean, and I don't know how that chasm can never be crossed. I've read many books by both philosophers and neuroscientists, and there's always a big gap that happens that whatever happens at the level of neurons and what happens, it does not cross into the mind. That's a separate issue. I don't know if it can ever be crossed, but it seems to me the free will and the question of what happens in neurobiology is a special case. So, I see the frustration. A lot of neuroscientists will say that the mind is just the brain in whatever it does. That is stated with a lot of faith. It's not clear that that's actually been demonstrated. What we know is that when I do things to brain tissue, that I can change the expression of behavior, which is our proxy for mind. It's one thing to say that what happens in the brain is a determinant for what happens in the mind. So, we don't actually know a great way of mental behavior other than the things that we could measure, which would be the brain activity of behavior. And I believe that to a large extent, and that's why I believe the relevance of quantum mechanics and the fact that there's indeterminism in the material world, outside of the brain, outside of humans, that in fact, something is going on in the brain, which makes use of that freedom of particles. I mean, we know very little about what happens. Most, you know, a lot of people work in neurobiology says, well, quantum mechanics doesn't play a role in this. Well, it doesn't, probably, at this level that is being split, but, you know, evolution is very opportunistic. It seems to me very likely that in the end, what's happening in the brain at the level of molecules does not use all kinds of purely quantum tunneling and this kind of correlation that's happening in quantum mechanics that are purely quantum mechanical, that these are not being used at the level, at the molecular level. I believe that's what's going on. And that's what happened. Well, simply because it's very hard to investigate what happens at that level in quantum mechanics, even when it's set up in special experiments, it's very hard to deal with it, although there are many interesting experiments going on at the level of single particles, but in the brain it's much, much harder, of course. And I believe that in the end it will be shown that there are critical effects, do play an important role in what's going on in the brain. And I think in the end that the free will that we feel, it will be connected up with this kind of spontaneity that happens with particles because I do believe that the arguments made by people like Hume and so on don't hold much water. I think he's talking, by the way, about free action. You know, he talks about if action is not coerced from the outside and I do what I want, then this is this is Hume, then I'm now half free will. I think that just simply begs the question. It could be that I don't have free will anyway because everything is determined, but it just happens to be that he was talking about classical mechanics, and if you talk about quantum mechanics the whole question doesn't arise anyway. So I mean, if I understand what you're saying, you're making a case for something like a random number generator at the moment. No, that's another point. You see, the compassionist say, agree with what I was saying here, that compassionism is in fact doesn't agree with free will. So they bring in random choice or random things, and the compassionist say, well, you know better often we are. If part of your choice is that you throw a coin and your choice is based on whether it's heads or tails, how have you gotten away? How's that free will? So random choice doesn't help. There's a subtle point here. What happens in quantum mechanics is not random choice. If I do a single act, look at the decay of a single particle, it will decay at a certain time, and that happens at a purely random time. That's true. But what happens in quantum mechanics is if you have several, say, two particles that become entangled or correlated in a quantum mechanical way, then what they do together is far from random. What happens here, actually in the case, what's called the Einstein Podolsky, Rosen experiment, the EPI experiment, what happens actually determines what happens in the other one, and you get effects that are very, very different from random choice. It's these correlations which can happen over distances that I think play in a major, will end up playing a major role in understanding how the brain works, and in particular how free will can occur in the brain. It's not random choice. That's a classical notion, which is sort of its supply of something much more radical in quantum mechanics, that is a relatively random choice, but it's a kind of correlated choice that happens that's much more complicated. Can I just jump in and out? I just want to understand what you are saying, because I have the impression that for me it's something like music, what you're saying. I don't fully understand it, but I have a sense that this matters and that is translatable into some kind of theologians have been discussing in a completely different language. It would be very helpful if we could make these languages compatible in order to understand what we are each talking about. What I hear you saying about spontaneity, something about leaps that are not random but still leaps. So in theology the vocabulary for that is something new is happening. You know that it's not random, but it is something things are coming together, and it is no longer the question, whether I go to Mases and I choose a black dress or a blue dress. I mean this is not this kind of free will thing, but it is something can I go beyond the or you know in which I am trapped, I mean I lose this or that, but it does not difference, or it makes a difference, but it is not the difference that I would say is the theological difference, the difference between life and death, survival or not survival. I mean you know kind of going out of this bondage of choosing things that are destructive and finding a way to live that is no longer self-destructive for example, self-destructive. By kind of things coming together happening in a way, I don't know where, sub-atomic or whatever you call that or in the brain, the neurons or whatever. So the, I mean this is what theologians have been discussing and they have talked about spirit in that. The spirit transforms the ways we act and then they transform the whole experiment. It is a different, it is moved, moved it in a different space and there all of a sudden we see things happening before and it is not random, it is not it's still in this kind of oval shape, but it is something that maybe we didn't expect. Let me bring up something you said with your two cases, one of which is coerced and the other one isn't. You are mentioning addiction. Suppose you look at a person who is really addicted to heroin or cigarettes and he really can't get around that. Now if you say, I want a cigarette, I want to smoke a cigarette and I smoke it. You would say, okay, you are using your free will. But if I am really a dead, I may not want what I want, right? But I can't get around it. I am coerced in that sense internally and this is by the way this argument that determinism cannot be compatible with free will. Because if determinism happens inside, simply because I wanted I am being forced to want it just like an addict. So this idea of addiction sort of makes no one I think in this room would say that somebody who is addicted to heroin and thus bad things is at the same level as somebody who is not. And that is a big distinction, we all feel there is a moral distinction there. Right. And I think this idea then is, you know, we all agree on this and how it plays out from the idea of general physical theories is a very difficult question. As I said, there is no very good, current experiments that bring in to the brain this idea of spontaneous action of particles. By the way, that is a very old idea. I mentioned Epicurus actually brought in 2300 years ago the very, this very idea. He said, look, you know, there was this idea of Democritus that everything is atoms and things just fall into the void if they are heavy or go up into the heavens. He says, first of all, there are actions going on if you do this. But also he won't get free will. So he posited tiny little what a click, kilomens, is that what it was called now swerves. Some of you may have read the Greenblatt's book called The Swerve. It's about, you know, the creatures book on Epicurus. And he introduced a sort of spontaneous action of the variables to interact, but also so that the re-will can exist. Because he didn't believe what these Chrysopus and the Stoics believed that you can have free will if everything is determined. So this idea, quantum ideas really goes back to the Greeks of 2300 years ago. So I guess I'm curious where you get where this goes from spontaneous action of molecules. Because some evidence actually in the brain that there is a lot of spontaneous activity. And you could take tissue preparation to see this spontaneous activity. Now whether that's tied to something we don't understand yet or if it is some kind of spontaneous action, that's a whole other area of research and it's ongoing. I don't think, I don't know. People have talked about that there are articles saying quantum mechanical effects already existed at the level of animals and they give examples with bird flight and various other things. I'm not convinced that doesn't sound. The experiments are not that. I mean I've written a sensitive event to detect a single photon. Yes, single photons are detected by the retina and go to detect them. So it's clear that single particles like photons have an effect on the brain. We essentially see one or two photons. I mean the thing that's stunned me is that you could set things up so that a single photon could cause a per- right? You set them up, you get the experimental controlled and you give them the instruction. When you see a photon get up and run a marathon. And if they're willing participant that'll trigger it and they'll go. And that's a whole lot of activity that's sponsored by a single photon. And it's kind of, but there's certainly other effects in the brain that they're likely taking on these effects. So I'm curious, I guess where do you get from the spontaneous action to kind of a freedom in choice? Because when we talk about free choice the question is about who is in control? Is it me, the agent that's in control? Or is it a control external to me? You mustn't think of this that a single particle in the brain is this spontaneity of a single particle. I don't see that as translated into our free will. It's a whole unknown network which is partly spontaneous, partly regulated by the network itself. That somehow gets translated. I'm not saying I have any theory at all about it. I just have the hope and even the expectation that nature works, evolution works in such an opportunity. I can't believe that it doesn't make use of these quantum mechanical effects. I'll share your disbelief. I'm absolutely nature. I'd like you to take advantage of it. But is there any reason to expect that the kinds of non-random forms of spontaneity that you feel is established within? I call it random. It's not non-random. It's an artistic thing, but these correlations are not random. That's what I say. Oh, sorry. So the question is, is there any reason to believe that what you let's say rightly claim that there's none of spontaneity that counter the deterministic effect, that those things will coincide with the things that in understanding the free will we talk about, such as intentions to pick up this thing. I mean, it just seems to me this absolute, we have no framework by which to say, this non-random spontaneity that's established, case by case translate into the intention that with which I drank this, which constitutes my freedom, the intention with which he picked up the microphone, which we have no framework to say that these two things will coincide. No, coincide. But there are experiments in which single molecules are supposed to let you recognize your grandmother. What's sometimes called the grandmother cell. Single cells, I should say, not particles, single cells may have such effects. So the fact that, you see, there are some correlations of this type between what happens in neurobiology and what happens at the level of mind that you're talking about. Whether free will will be one of them, I don't know, I just have a, that's only a hope and maybe, you know, an expectation, but that's all it is. And there are some sort of more simple things in your bio, correlate with this. Because if you take Libi's experiments, you know, these these RPs, which are detected by the EEG and so on, are speaking directly what's measuring what's going on when somebody's flexing, you know, contracting a muscle to raise their wrist and so on and so forth. And there's a, immediately, I mean, the observations of the evidence are immediately linked to things which have to do with the intention that's involved when I flex my wrist, etc. But you are talking at a level of abstraction and distance from this when you talk about, you know, the non-random sort of spontaneity that is then quantum. We have no framework by which to bring these two things together. So maybe there's something here. So one thing that humans are really good at are telling stories, but also filling in details, right? So I can imagine that there might be some kind of spontaneous action that gives rise to behavior that's unpredictable even for the agent themselves or for others. But then it's filled in with, well, why did I do that? Well, and then you kind of fill in these confidely that stories from the agent's perspective. But if you don't have a framework which connects them, it's like pure fantasy to me. You have to do a framework which says, the spontaneity is established at the quantum level, etc. The sorts of things that are relevant to the intention to drink this or to pick up that mic and so on. Whereas, we have a framework by which to link what is delivered by Libe's experimental objects and things like flexing the wrist and so on. These things are just theoretically. There's a chasm between them. And you have to say, well, we can expect the two things will be brought together. If you don't have a framework to think, it sounds like a completely Idrospection, but there are some not free will, more complex, but at least there are things in the mind, for instance, recognizing a person which are connected to single cells having certain things. I was hoping that another speaker would be, another discussant would be here. Peter Tse, I think there was talk of inviting him. He does experience, I don't know a lot of what he does, but I read an article at the level of scientific American in which he does experiments in which certain decisions are connected up again to a single molecule, a large molecule, an organic molecule, but activating the molecule is connected up to certain decisions. I'm not, this is far from anything like that. I think we'll continue to have these and many more experiments that I think made extraordinary progress in the understanding of the working of the brain and the human family. The question, I think the fundamental question is, what is it going to say about free will, ultimately? I think we're always, correct if I'm wrong, but I think from a point of view of theory, we're always going to hit a and then decidability wall as it were regarding the true nature of human choice, correct if I'm wrong. We're going to understand it a lot better. Remember, the spontaneity of, you can't explain well, it satisfies these quantum mechanical rules. Why is the particle choose to go back in a famous Stern-Gail Act experiment that silver atoms sent through some kind of electromagnetic field and it's a size to go this way or this way? That's the end of the story. The choice it makes between this and that simply is left as part of the theory and there's no explanation. If you try to give an explanation of this then you're back to classical physics and you run into this kind of contradiction. You just simply cannot explain, you're stuck with this spontaneity, it's like as it is with Epicurus, it's there and you have to accept it. The question is, how do you connect that to free will? I can't tell you. I mean, I don't know. I think we will go now to the audience for their questions. I want to be brief. Please questions in preference to comment. With all respect, I believe this discussion has confused the indeterminacy of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle which governs subatomic particles with the nature of our behavior. Our behavior is determined by the firing of neurons so that it is completely deterministic. If a photon hits our retina, and that may be a random event or a non-deterministic event, our subsequent behavior is still deterministic. I don't know how you come to that conclusion. The firing of neurons, so what? I mean, how do we don't know how there's a certain classical level at which they fire, but there's all kinds of things going on at the atomic level, which we know that atomic interactions satisfy the rules of quantum mechanics, how this counts? However, once the neurons fire, our behavior is completely determined. We don't have control over that. There's room in between the neuron within the brain firing in the actual expression of the behavior. You could have folks who have had physical injuries that would actually block that communication reaching to the muscles right? So just having neurons fire doesn't exactly mean that you're going to get the expression of some behavior absolutely. It's always going to be probabilistic. You might have that window defined so that it's extremely high probability, but all kinds of things could have been not just within the biological agent but also the environment. We're talking about making the connection between neural activity and some kind of behavior or choice and all things being equal. We don't know exactly how the quantum effects within the molecules that make up the neurons. That's just an open question so I'll just end that. The firing is at the end of the... Once everything is fired, you can say the decision is made. Yes, but what about what happened until then? That could be beyond our choice. That's beyond our choice. That's random. Non-deterministic. It's life and not a choice. Some of the choices we make now will have a huge impact on where we end up five years from now. Life choices. That includes the kind of neural activity that might go on five years from now. So there is an idea in decision neuroscience of goal directed behavior and goal directed decision making where we might have some goal put off in time. And so we can start to do things between now and then so that it's not immediate effect but start to build support and structure so that we can achieve those goals. How is that non-deterministic? I'm not saying it's not necessarily. Thank you for making a categorical mistake. The firing of the neurons in the brain collective manner, that's what constitutes the decision itself. And the firing may itself have a spontaneous or free will add, you know, we don't know what causes this firing, that firing, how they come together in some complicated way. To say that because after the fire runs, you know, there's no decision after they fire, yes, but we're talking about what happens until there's some collective firing of the neurons leads gives us the decision that we make. All of that as a matter of neurobiology may have a spontaneous element, which is what we call making the decision. Okay. Thanks. I'm just going to sound like that. I would like to offer obviously overly simplistic, but causal or quasi-causal model that attempts to integrate some of the different things I've been talked about. So it starts at the quantum level with virtual particle pair creation. This is being a quantum phenomenon. It's also the case that some of these virtual particles emerge and typically fall back to the vacuum state once they emerge. Sometimes they're energetic enough to remain in our level of physical reality if you would allow that. So if we couple this happening within neural tissue, and one of those newly created non-determinist and virtual particles then interacts with the intracellular neuronal environment in such a way that it contributes to the firing or not firing threshold of that neuron. Then we have a potential example of the relationship between quantum non-determinism and a neural network. So then we take it the next step and to the research that you mentioned about the effect of partially magnetic fields, the neocortex generates a weak electromagnetic field which may in fact have also an effect on the way in which the virtual particles enter or not and acts on that may or not be about approaching firing threshold. And it's also the case in terms of the molecule mentioned that we now know a great deal more than we knew even last year about the molecules that are recruited in the say memory formation process and the DSBs, the dual strand breakages and reconstitution that caused the formation of America. All of these events involve the recruitment of the effect of molecules that could be brought about by the activation of the virtual particle made real. That's my idea and I would like first of course your opinion. There are many quantum mechanical effects including the virtual particles we have created and go back and forth and some that say I mention another tunneling, there's another one. To me the question of quantum mechanical, what are called entanglement or correlations play a probably. But all this is speculation. It's all speculation. But it does mean it's worth speculating in this way or way because without that we're back to the compatibility question which I think is now irrelevant given quantum mechanics. Okay, thank you very much. We talked about the utility of belief of free will regardless of whether it might be an illusion or not. Pew research in 2014 conducted a poll and they found that 54% of Americans deny that climate change is happening and that human beings are causing it. Now, let's take me as an example. Let's say I believe in free will and you're a scientist and you're telling me I am of my free will I'm causing climate change that may cause you know catastrophic effects to the entire world to civilization then wouldn't that free will believe perhaps contribute to my denying that climate change is happening in order to preserve my self worth myself identity. So, let me have it in. We've been ignoring the information about climate change and making decisions that are destroying the planet, let's say. And your question is is this not an exercise or will for exercise a free will? No, the question is if I will leave in free will and scientists are telling me that I'm doing this, wouldn't I be much more likely to go into denial in order to not feel guilty and indict myself and other people? I see. Well, this may be I mean on this subject I feel that the causal links between our behavior fossil fuel addicted behavior and the differences to the climate have not been established with the same spectacular public visibility as for instance the causal links between nuclear power and the destruction of Hiroshima Nagasaki establish. The reason why we all know about the nuclear possibilities of nuclear disaster is that the links the causal links between our behavior and some disaster were completely in fact spectacularly established in the nuclear case, there's still a matter of arcane knowledge in the climate change case and that's the real problem. We just have not got the causal links established for the public mind everywhere and maybe we're doing this out of guilt and maybe there are people who are doing it willfully but corporations are paying people to hide the facts and so on but by and large I think the real thing is to get the information out in a way that it was out in the nuclear thing. Nobody denies the the knowledge is in the nuclear case. It's just different in the climate case and it took Hiroshima and Nagasaki to establish that causal link. But I think that is a difference because I mean changing our behavior with regard to fossil usage and climate change and ecology requires us to kind of change the things we like. It is the addiction issue. I mean I like my cigarette and if I'm a drug user I need that and I don't want to change so you know if they tell me this is going to happen I mean we see it is happening now but you know if still the powerful happened in 10 years in 20 years so why not cave in and just enjoy it. That's absolutely true. I agree with you and I think what you mentioned of St. Paul actually goes back to this. This is if you put it that way this is no different from the fact that most of us know that if we fill our gut at every meal we're going to die before we would if we didn't do so and yet most of us do fill our gut. So it's the climate change case is not different once you describe it that way and in that sense it's an irrationality of the kind that Paul and others mentioned right we know the better we do the worse. Well I think it's also a sense of a perversion of what used to be rational. So it used to be the case that we should fill our gut. Because our meals didn't come three times a day. And likewise the addictions to cigarettes I mean these are experiments that I have participated with and looked at in the groups that I've worked with. Nicotine gets into your brain and it changes the chemistry fundamentally and we have experiments, Terrell O'Ranza and Reid Montague to my colleagues that ran that show that fundamental computations that are very important to how we learn new information. That representation in our brain is changed by these drugs of addiction. And there's new work coming along where we're looking at how beliefs could either insulate us from taking on new information or not. And I think as far as with the climate change issue people know what's important to them and their family and that either insulates them from new information or allows them to bring it in. I mean it's if it's 50-50 split it just gives you an idea of how the variety of beliefs that we have will have an impact on what comes next. It's connection to free will. I think that it's not so clear to me. I just want to say thanks for having this discussion. This is the most important topic in the history of time. So whoever's in charge here should have more free will discussions because there's no more important topic. I just want... My name is Nick. I'm actually the producer of a TV show on Wednesday on Channel 56 Time Warner. It's called Free Will Question Mark. We debate free will every Wednesday at 11 in Cable Access Manhattan. George is my co-host over there. And he has a show on white planes. I went back to my question. Can any of you geniuses who... Alright. Can any of you guys give me one example in your entire life that was a free will decision? Or anybody in the audience? Just give me one example of a free will decision. Coming here today. Was there a cause for that? Decision. Was there a cause or a reason for that decision? Well, I'm an economist. So I think that costs their benefits. I've balanced them and I made a decision. What's... Or a reason to your decision. You just admitted it. Right? Yeah. That cause. And a cause to that cause. You can regress your cause and your cause will change back to the moment before you were born. We didn't self-cause ourselves. Our parents had sex. Therefore that's an easy reputation of free will. I don't know what's so difficult for you to admit. So part of the cause was my own decision of my mind. Our self-cause. You're a little guide. You're a first cause. You can cause things without any prior causation. Is that what you're telling me? No. So you're just saying... So you said his decision to come here was a freely willed decision and it had a cause. You just said that, right? Yeah. And that cause has a cause and that cause has a cause regressing back to the moment before you were conceived, before the planets were evolved before the big bang. The cause is... Just because there are causes doesn't mean the... Cause there's a cause. It doesn't mean it's a determining cause. You know, Leidenitz had a certain principle of sufficient reason and which he says, everything that happens has a cause that actually determines it. Quantum mechanics tells you that that law is false. Okay, so determinism or indeterminism does not prove free will. I mean, if you make an indeterminism... Wait a minute. So I'm just saying, you know, there are restrictions on my freedom. Certainly I can't grow through that wall even if I want to because it won't stop... It'll stop me from going through it. On the other hand, I can walk around in the room. I mean, just because it's not a question of randomness or complete free will or what have you versus complete determined things by causes. There's a whole complex of causes that says, I'm going to marry this woman. Determining some of them not. I want to make this more simple. I don't know any of you guys. I know the cause is always the pleasure principle otherwise known as hedonic imperative. You're always predicting what will give you the most amount of pleasure and the least amount of pain. So that's the cause for every decision. You have no choice but to do that. No free will. I don't know why we have to have... That's your theory but I think we can... I'll be happy to do this after the meeting. So you're going to tell me how I can go towards the meeting. I promise you after the meeting... After the meeting you and I will discuss it. My thing is every cause is going toward your... Every human being has no choice but to attempt to go to the meeting. I heard that. I heard that. The last thing I'll say is the belief in free will is very harmful. It's very toxic. It makes people hate other people. It causes suicide. People want to punish themselves because they think they could have done otherwise which is obviously BS. And it makes people feel like failures when they fail at something. I think whoever believes in free will, it needs to take a hard look in the mirror and just know that you believe in free will because you have no choice but to do what makes you feel best about yourself for going towards the place of play. Okay. Thank you. Next question. The guys will use the free will. Hello, hello. He's constrained to do it, right? Yeah, just a minute. Everything's going on. It makes people in your personal history the conditioner response. Next question. Next question. Okay, so that was a perfect segue for me. My name is Sheila Meats. Okay, and I do this work as a profession. I've done thousands of sessions. And what some people here may know about energy psychology is what we're learning as all negative emotion comes from a disturbed energy field and on tapping on certain points while we hold consciousness in mind to tuning it to an issue actually brings it up to the surface. And what I have found is that there has been no evidence of free will from my work with my client. Because once I clear whether we talk about the information or morphogenetic fields that you may know about as a scientist from Bruce Lipton's information on cellular biology wherever you go with that. Once we find that information and we remove that information, that person starts unfolding in different behavior. So it's still on some level determinism. But what I'd like to do is talk about the spiritual aspect. And I'm probably going to be a pain in the buck because every time I'm going to come here, I'm going to talk about spirituality. But I feel like people aren't talking about it enough. And as far as first cause is concerned as being pleasure, that's a possibility that's certainly a belief. But I'm going to go beyond that and I really want to hear what you have to say. And I'll sit on the screen. But I had an enlightenment experience that deeply changed my life. Where I got to experience myself as that or as God or divine or whatever. And what I want to say is and hear what you have to say is if there is nothing but God, creator, divine, and God contains all that there is to be known. And nature is God expressing as law. And law runs everything which is sentient and non-sentient. Isn't that determinism? Isn't it possible that free will is essential in us so that we as God, expressing self will be able to abandon oneself to a goic experience. Thank you. The interesting thing is if God is the all determining cause you could just quote one of these interesting Bilebose as well as says, yes but God created human beings in God's image. So we are part of this divine capacity to choose also. And you know of course in theology God is the supreme free will. And there is no over free will like that. But then you have and you see there are, this is why I am not a systematic theologian but a biblical scholar. So my area is the Bible. Because there is something else in storytelling than in constructing dogmatic big buildings. Stories tell things from the one side and from the other side. So you have a story where you hear that human beings are there to rule the earth and even subdue it which is a little bit horrible in light of contemporary concerns. But they are there. They are free will. The next story you read that is Genesis 1 and Genesis 2. Human beings are there and to preserve the earth. No freedom at all. They have just to kind of to accept their role as stewards of creation and they have to admit what is necessary. So how do you reconcile the two? And yeah by telling stories and stories like that that change you or you know and and I am kind of I'm finding these stories very interesting what we tell each other about the moments where we we are not following the pleasure principle but did I follow the pleasure principle in coming here? No I was scared to death because I never really thought about free will. You know this is not my area you know I feel uncomfortable but I thought it is important and you see the moment when we went out of our way and do something that we think is necessary. This is why I'm interested in in your I mean these kind of switches that happen when we change the cause of our own habits and habitus and kind of go into a different mode and maybe look more at the other than ourselves and all that. I think and these things happen I know they happen. So but you know this is what I think free will becomes a power that can change things and that's what I'm interested in here. Thank you. You know Isaac Beshavas Simba said we must believe in free will we have no choice. I just want to preface my comments and questions with a statement that I appreciate everything I'm wearing everyone on the panel said today. So this is a respectful if I have criticism it's respectful it's not meant to be negative. A little bit about myself undergraduate. Keep in mind we have four other people. I do that much time. You don't have to worry about me being the case I'm very to the point. So I appreciated that gentleman's passion and to the point. My undergraduate molecular biologist from MIT, JD MBA year spent at Penn Medical School I loved hearing all the comments reminded me of grad school. Unfortunately it also reminded me of the fact that you guys are so brilliant that you're talking up here and for the rest of us unfortunately it's very difficult because you're not defining what you're operating terms are. What is predetermined is versus free will. Dr. Cochin obviously a brilliant mathematician I appreciate that. I spent time on the trading floor as a market maker and I understand probabilistic theory but are we saying that free will it has to be a conscious decision in our own rational best interest given what our probabilities are. We never really nail that down. So I to to the point shortly I have two very concrete questions. One is and my almost respect to philosophy I think this is a philosophical exercise philosophy informs everything we do. Science art is this a philosophical exercise what is the purpose because from my point of view people are rational beings they don't but they don't always behave rationally so you cannot always predict their behavior. Dr. Krabal I'm sure you would agree economists have this problem. Keynesian economists have had problems with the economy all over the world we're looking at a currency crash and I'm not getting political but the Austrians their main criticism is you can't quantify all human behavior people are rational beings but they also act with passion and irrationally. I was saying to my colleague that maybe someone who would be very good on this panel would be someone from the intelligence operations community they have to use game theory to predict human behavior both in populations and excuse me let me just finish let me finish let me tell you you have two concrete questions I would like you to ask those two concrete questions I don't want you to expand on them because we have other people and then we have I am giving to the point and I don't know your name I don't know your background sir so so intelligence community has failed to predict several instances economists has failed do you acknowledge that this is a useful exercise interesting but there is no concrete end point in this because unfortunately you cannot you cannot always predict human behavior and you I'll put it in more concrete terms in experimental design in experimental design it is important to define your independent as well as your dependent variables this is multi factorial if we want to talk about photons all day long we could certainly there's an effect the some of those effects does it affect us yes what is the point of the exercise and what are your operating definitions that's it's a why it's and I don't mean to be disrespectful no I really just want to understand thank you the why is important but I'm as far as I'm concerned let me try to answer I talk about prediction and of course it's very close to related to the issue of free will you know if there's free will then there's no prediction whenever there's human behavior I actually think the distinction or the distance between human based endeavors like economics and non behavioral endeavors like physics or thermodynamics or what have you smaller than distance between simple models and complex models simple models and economics for example studying treasury bill auctions when people do models of that actually pretty good fairly accurate in predicting price levels and trade volumes if models trying to predict the economy which is an incredibly complex system we do very poorly thing is true in fact if you think about it nowadays with the you know with physical sciences it's very easy to have laboratory models of Newtonian classic mechanics that are extremely good at predicting whatever you want to predict but we still cannot successfully predict whether more than five or six days why because it's an incredibly complex model so I don't think it's so much an issue about I don't think free will in here is playing a very important role it's more a matter of model complexity that's the economist answer to that thank you thank you thank you so much for your round table this is wonderful what is your definition each of you of will not free will but will and how does it exclude animals? free will but will and how does it exclude animals? good or exclude animals it's been a very it's it was brought up briefly but just how does it exclude animals or does it so I'll just start with my shared confusion I think on what we mean by free will and we talk about it being ambiguous but we don't know how to exit exactly right so for me when I think about this question I actually set it aside because the notion of free will or will it could be choice it could be intent to choose it could be a whole range of things that we all as individuals kind of share some stake in with the definition ends up being but what it is we're talking about when we talk about free will is how do people make choices how do those choices come from what motivates them and so for me as a neurobiologist I study that behavior I study the organism which we call humans and I give them choices and I study their brain activity and so the idea of a will or free will is a provocative concept and it has used to discuss these kinds of things but what I'm interested when I think about that is to be for choice in what controls that so I do think that's a very important and I think I'm not going to say anything about the will because I think the issue can be raised by just talking about freedom and not talking about some particular faculty called the will and this sort of sums up I guess my angle on many of the interesting things that have come up in what have surfaced and what my colleagues have said you see I completely agree that in the end this is a special topic within the larger problem of the mind-body problem and I agree with people like Libé they're not particularly with the conclusions he becomes to on that particular evidence that he provides but I generally agree with the view that there is a real sense in which if you talk about the dispositions of an animal's mind which yield the animal's behavior and you talk about the dispositions of bodies whether animals or human beings there is bound to be a reduction in some sense of the dispositions the mental dispositions to the physical dispositions so if there is freedom and if the mind is in some way not in these ways dependent on or reducible to the dispositions of the body it can only be I think it carries the mind contains an element that is normative if you think of the mind human beings or animals if you think of human beings as being just like animals then the mind has tendencies just because they are mental tendencies rather than bodily or physical tendencies doesn't mean that they are outside of nature so if nature is deterministic and not as you suggest it is if nature is deterministic then the mind because it is if it contains nothing but natural tendencies is determined and there is a difference as you've been saying but if the mind contains a normative element that is when people so suppose an animal does something it's frustrated it changes to something else you might think well that's animal rationality well maybe it is animal rationality but the animal doesn't change the behavior by thinking what I did was wrong there is no normative element right it just gets frustrated and it moves to something else that's not normative in the full fled sense of thinking this was wrong I ought to do this it's normativity of that kind which I think is not possessed by animals it's possessed only by us and that's what I think if anything shows that the mind is not just tendencies in nature but is set apart you know the question of will really touches on the psychoanaly question of motivation but Robin and I both of us stayed out of this discussion because we didn't want to bring that in which I not to get tongue tight here so most of the dialogue was focused kind of from this anthropomorphic viewpoint on specifically around the problems of the individual I think that's maybe because like the first step is to conquer this idea of losing ourself or our dualist intuitions that we have this kind of privileged seat in the Cartesian theater and that science can't probe the subjective but and I think maybe it's a language thing that if we develop the language but my question what I was interested in more so was that we can overcome that for the moment and suspend our disbelief move away from this anthropomorphic perspective on free will and think about it non-superhuman and purely materialistic level the question is is matter moving towards and possibly if it's not capable of achieving free will and would that be a kind of way to move towards a kind of designed determinism in a way if that makes any sense? So one of the things that I tried to put forth and the way that I see the progress of science on these kinds of problems is that as we learn how the system operates our brain our bodies it gives us new options right so so there's lots of ways in which we might not be able to make a choice that we might be constrained one of them is that we don't know what the options are if you don't know the option you don't ever have the option to make that choice so as we learn about what guides our choice behavior what we can have longer term goals where we can intervene on that and actually implement the space of possibilities we do that by inventing new medicines or new technologies that give us 10 years ago in some sense we are increasing for our species the options going forth some of them might not Thank you. Hi. Well there's been a very constructive flow of ideas that are not any different. I'm an undergraduate student and I'm really interested in artificial intelligence and its impact on future upcoming technologies and especially more so how is quantum theory going to I won't say determined but anticipate these future technologies and the impact on our society and do you think that if given unlimited resources and unlimited I guess the ultimate proficiency in algorithms could we create a machine that's capable of replicating itself enough to maybe free willing? Actually so there is just within the last month or two there's a paper study published by a team at Google where they've developed an algorithm that could basically human level control in the context of a video game space so it's a really interesting development kind of a cute experiment so they have their algorithm play Atari 2600 games and they basically give the algorithm very little information about as much information as you might have coming into a game and the algorithm can learn how to play it to the level of a professional game tester with not better on some of the games and so the report is called human level control through this deep reinforcement learning algorithm and this is the core of the algorithm is something that we look at how mammalian brains and actually other systems do learn and so here it's not going to necessarily quantum level depictions but this is just a computation that this algorithm is able to execute where it's able to learn from its environment and feedback to the level of how you and I might play a video game so if you're interested in that you should look at that but how does that free will? The point of view and what I've said is that the idea of free will isn't necessarily a useful one for what we're actually interested in studying here what we're interested in is how do humans behave what's the sources of that whether it's free that's not necessarily useful all of our choices are constrained what we're biological so there are constraints there's limits to that now that we can get a computer algorithm to display a level of control that a human can within that environment I think is an interesting kind of demonstration of where technology is going. It does provide by the way I think an interesting test I don't know if you could rent that test if you had a very large number of such highly evolved artificial intelligence beings it would be interesting to see whether there was any distinctive feature in their behavior vis-a-vis humans in a variety of situations I think it would be an interesting test for at least some notion of free will if the answer is no then I would say that there is no free will as we're defining it in here as at least as I was thinking of defining it I think. Okay thank you very much Thank you very much Thank you very much