 Okay, we're going to get started. Welcome to the Helix Center for Interdisciplinary Investigation of the New York Psychoanalyx Society Institute. I'm Rob Penzer, associate director of the center. Before I turn the program over to Beth Hayes to introduce this, the last Helix roundtable for this calendar year, I wish to entice you and entreat you. First the Intreaty. As we near the holidays and hence the traditional time of giving, please consider giving back to the Helix Center in recognition of and appreciation for the stimulating and always free programs we've brought to you, our community, and will continue to bring to you with your generous support. Go to our website, thehelixcenter.org. Excuse me, click the donate button and follow the instructions to make your contribution online, by mail, or by telephone. Now the enticement. We have in the work some extraordinary roundtables coming your way in calendar year 2013. Unsynthetic biology, the topography of fear, known and unknown, complexity and emergence, love, icons, God and different religions to name but a few. Follow us on our website, on Facebook and Twitter for announcements about these roundtables and next year's poetry, music and film events too. If you're not on our mailing list, please go to our website, sign up with your name and make sure that you also enter your email address. Now I'd like to turn things over to Beth Hayes of our executive committee who deserves great thanks today for developing and single-handedly organizing today's roundtable on animal language. Thanks Beth. Okay, this is the best I can do. This is Chris Clark here on my lab. Chris is the director of the bioacoustics research program at Cornell's lab of ornithology and is a senior scientist in the department of neurobiology at Cornell. He works at the interface of science, applied engineering, industry regulation and NGOs. Dr. Clark's work includes monitoring of large whale distributions and other oceanographic studies using passive acoustic detection and aerial surveys and genetic and photo ID data. He and his staff have developed a suite of analytic procedures and metrics for understanding the acoustics of ocean ecosystems and they're launched through human interference and he uses these collaboratively with other research departments and institutes also. And then over here we have Dr. Ray Doherty, associate professor of linguistics at NYU. Dr. Doherty completed his PhD combining electrical engineering work at MIT with studies of coordinate structures and recursion in language at the linguistics department at NYU under N which is on the use of Chomsky's universal grammar to represent English, French and German in a prologue computer language. And most recently he's been working on the evolutionary biology of the inner ear using some mathematical representations and analog digital converter models to understand human sound processing and how it's evolved over millions of years. Over here we have Dr. James Fuller. He's now Dr. James Fuller as of a few weeks ago who recently defended his doctoral dissertation in Columbia. His research focused on the evolution and expansion of vocal signal repertoire focusing on the communication systems of blue monkeys. He has also lectured on the evolution and usage of communication systems in birds and mammals and the sensory systems of vertebrates. And then we have Dr. James Higum over there. He is an assistant professor of biological anthropology at NYU. Is it Higum or Ohio? I am. It's okay. I am. My professor. His research interest is sexual selection and communication and primate signaling behavior. From a variety of perspectives that he uses, genetic, neuroendocrine, behavioral and morphologic. He studies everything from the cocks, baboons and guanons. Guanons? Guanons, yeah. To a game theory signaling models and computational models of primate perception. He's author of a number of dozen publications and the guest editor of a number of journals on primate signaling, primate coloration and multimodal animal communication. And then finally we have Dr. Diana Reese who is a cognitive psychologist and professor in the department of psychology at Hunter and the department of biopsychology and behavioral neuroscience at the graduate center of CUNY. And Dr. Reese develops and directs the Dolphin Cognition program at the National Aquarium in Baltimore and studies elephant cognition at the Smithsonian National Zoo. I had the great good fortune when my kids were little of having a special backstage dolphin tour with her at the New York Aquarium where she was then the director of the marine mammal program. And so in addition to her scholarship in cetacean and animal cognition and the evolution of intelligence including pioneering work in the investigation of dolphin abilities through underwater key birds and responses to the mirror. Dr. Reese is known for her protection of dolphins in the tuna industry and the rescuing of stranded marine animals everywhere such as Humphrey the whale. Her most recent book is the Dolphin in the Mirror. So those are our panelists and I will just route to the question of what do we mean when we say animals communicate and let you guys go from there. Maybe a good way to start off is to sort of define the word communication and in the essence. I mean there are many different definitions but it really comes from the Latin word meaning to share. It's exchange and share signals. And I think we all agree pretty much that's a real basic as low as we can go sharing signals. And I think the one thing that I'd like to throw out there today is that we used to think that we were the only communicating species. We really did. We thought we were the only species certainly with language and for a long time we thought that we were the only species that could think and or could communicate in any meaningful way. So I think one of the things that is a big idea is that all animals communicate in some way so maybe we can take it from the other. So a caveat to that is the notion that the communication is intentional as opposed to a deer is not communicating as it rustles leaves as it runs through the forest. You can't hear me. Is that louder? And the great rustling begins. Yes, the sweet beans. So I was saying that one of the components of this notion of communication is that it's intentional. It's not some byproduct of an action. But there's a difference between evolutionary intentionality and cognitive intentionality and the way that we use it. I wouldn't say most animal communication is intentional. I give a baboon has a large sexual swelling or a little insect flashes a light to another that, speaking of communication, I mean, evolution has acted for signaling to occur over evolutionary time. It's not that a female baboon is thinking I'm going to grow that morphology on my hind quarters so that I can indicate my ovulation. But there's still clearly communication going on there. So I wouldn't say, I mean, there's a difference between signals which have, I think there's two different issues. If you're talking about a deer rustling in the forest, you could argue that that's a cue rather than a signal and there's the whole cue signal debate. But then there's a separate argument, I think, about the difference between signals that have been selected for over evolutionary time and what goes on in here when animal signal. So you brought up something very interesting. It's a signaling right here. It's going to happen every few minutes. Only when very good points are made. I think one of the points actually that Diana said is that people, I think what you said was that people didn't realize or didn't at least accept that animals, that non-human animals communicate until relatively recently. But I think one of the problems with communication is how difficult it is to talk about it. In that the word humans are an inherently linguistic species. We use language, we think linguistically, we communicate linguistically. Just about every example we ever give has a linguistic framework to it. So we can't imagine any other way of communicating. And so when we find that non-humans animals are communicating in non-linguistic paradigms or non-linguistic frameworks, we can't make sense of it and therefore we dismiss it. And I think what James may, well, we don't because we're learned at scholars. But I think a lot of people have a tendency to dismiss it and I think what James was referring to was the fact that from an evolutionary perspective, there's a lot of communication behavior that takes place on many, many different levels. And I would assume that very few of them reach the cognitive complexity of human language or human communication. But that doesn't make them any less or more fascinating or evolutionary important. No, I would throw out this idea again. I'm throwing out ideas here that we don't know. I mean, we often say it's not as complex as what we do. But I think there's this vast sort of ignorance about what we really know about the content of the signals, what it's actually conveying. And I'll give you a good example. When I was in graduate school, I was actually a linguistics major. I was really interested in studying communication in humans and other animals and how they use these signals. And I found that there was a man named René G. Bismell who had been studying the human-wistled languages in the world. Now these are languages where people send whistles back and forth, much like you hear birds' bird whistles or dolphin whistles. But it's based on the spoken language. So in that very nice way, we know what the content of those whistles are. And you hear sounds like, now if I heard that coming from a dolphin or a bird, I might just think, that's really simple because what can you put in a whistle? But when you look at these whistle languages, they're conveying the words that we whistle. And that was a real lesson, I think, and a humbling that you can pack a lot of information into what looks like perhaps a very simple set of signals, three whistles. And those are actually words and sentences. So I actually would argue that we simply don't know in many cases what's encoded in those whistles. So do we assume that to qualify as having language or linguistics that it has to follow the syntactical and grammatical rules of these? And so... Do you want to do more distinctions made now or later? Now we'll probably do this. Sure. I'm going to guess we're not going to actually solve anything. That's just my prediction for the day. He just came out of his PhD. No, I think that what I was saying earlier that one of the inherent challenges in studying communication is terminology and specificity in what we mean by it. I mean, I actually got about halfway through a book before, and I won't mention who it is in case they're here, on language and whether or not apes have language or the capacity for language and not once in at least 150 pages before I threw it away, did he define language? Correct. I find that fascinating that we can actually question whether or not a species or even a group of organisms has the capacity for something without actually defining what the criteria of that are. And so I've read very, very, very simple, simplistic definitions of language that speak to referential, semanticism, syntactic capacities. And if that's the case, then we may have some evidence of non-humans using it. But I don't believe that that's the case. So to answer your question again, to readdress it, the whole world of semiotics and zoosymatics, the study of signs and symbols. So let's take the case of an animal that has a swollen rear and it's red. That could serve as a signal that's been selected for to attract a mate, a certain time, a signal. If we think about or assign perhaps. If we think about a symbol and the way symbols are defined, if we all agree, is it something that represents something else? I think we have evidence in the animal world, at least, that certain animals can be taught to use symbols. It may not qualify as language the way we define it, but certainly we've seen with dolphins in training at the University of Hawaii and there's some evidence in some of the work I've done, although I haven't called them symbols. And in Alex the African Ray Parrot, work that's been done to train him on functional communication skills and some of the chimp language studies and the chimp communication studies, those animals under double blind conditions without any cueing from the people who work with them can use the word symbolically. So I think we have some evidence for that. And it doesn't mean we know how they use it in their own world or if they do use it symbolically, but they seem to have this capacity. I think that's an important finding. So I hope that helps. I mean, the classic functionally referential example in animal communication is the chaney and so forth vervet monkey alarm calls, where vervet monkeys respond in one specific way to see in a snake and a different specific way to seeing an eagle and a different specific way to seeing a leopard. And individuals then, everybody else, has a specific response in response to the specific call that's an appropriate anti-predator response to that predator. Now that's the standard like when that first came out, that was in a science paper in 1980 and it was a big brahuhar at the time. And when that first came out, it was called referential communication. And then it got switched to functionally referential communication because they weren't sure they didn't want to imply so much about the cognition of the vervet monkeys and they were saying they're scared, sorry, heaven forbid. So they wanted to say more that look, as long as the monkey is, I guess they switched the emphasis from the signaler and what the signaler meant to the receiver, the perceiver, the second individual, what they could infer as a perceiver. And therefore, if you're walking through the forest as a vervet monkey and you see a snake and that makes you give a certain call because it arouses you to a certain level. As long as there's a statistical association with you giving that call and there being a snake such that whenever you hear that call as a perceiver, it always means there's a snake, you as a perceiver can create the referentiality. It doesn't have to be a construct of the signaler. It doesn't have to be that the vervet monkey sees the snake and thinks snake. So vervet monkey can just be aroused to a certain type of call by that stimulus and the perceiver as long as that level of arousal is always associated with the snake, it doesn't really matter what goes on the first vervet monkey's head. The second vervet monkey is able to infer snake regardless. So it became a more, it shifted towards a more kind of referential view to a more functionally referential. And all the discussion you have in communication is pretty much between adults with some internal mental structure of some sort. Almost all the work I've done just is on signal structures. For instance, I think there's a lot of things that couldn't be explained using that kind of a model. For instance, the very first cochlea that was in an inner ear was a very tiny little thing the size of a disc and it was kind of brittle. And then it gradually turned into a cylinder and that's what dinosaurs had. And then that stayed with the mammals, millions, hundreds of millions of years, until about 200 million years ago. And then you got the double helix, which the human beings have, which is a spiral. And I told people I would work in the word helix. So there it is, that's one already. But in any event, if you try to account for why it evolved in these different ways, first it's hard to do. But the cylinder is still what birds have. And now when it broke off from the cylinder and became a helix, what happened was there's an animal called the tenrec, T-E-N-R-E-C. It's worth looking up. It's a crazy little thing. It lives in Madagascar. And the mother has 22 children. It's at the bottom of the food chain. It looks like a small porcupine. But that's the first mammal there probably was. The second one was something along the lines of a platypus. Now, the tenrec evolved a cochlear that's enormously big. Wars is two and a half turns. This one's six and a half turns because it could hear an enormously high frequency. And the big problem was predation from lizards and snakes or something that could hear that high frequency like a bird. The way they communicated was not orally, they have porcupine things, and they flick their quills. And it goes, and the mother can immediately locate where the child is, and the child can call to the mother, since they're mammals, they must nurse, so the children must call to the mother. And the mother must be in close contact. This is not adult. I think a large amount of evolution of the internal organs of the body that are responsible for many of the speech phenomenon in fact comes from things like mother-child interaction. Now the platypus, which is my favorite animal, I think. I didn't know there were so many that were all over the place, apparently, in Australia. The platypus is a lizard-like animal, and it lays an egg, and then the mother hatches the egg, and the baby has a little egg tooth, and then nurses it. But the mother does not have breasts. The milk oozes directly out from her fur and her skin, and the little animal licks it off. Now they also have the bird cochlea. Now why did the platypus not need to evolve a very big cochlea to nurse the babies? Well, it's poisonous. Everything that crawls into a platypus nest becomes dinner. It's not going to eat something. It's going to be eaten. If it eats, I don't want to eat sound or any way. But it's a funny thing, that this kind of thing happens. And also if you just look at various complex signal communications, I've worked a lot with insects because they're somewhat different. And the reason I studied the insects is because the bird cochlea evolved to hear a very highly specific sound, and in fact it's the sound made by insects. So let me just give you one example, and then I'll be quiet. As you look at crickets, and I've started studying crickets for any number of reasons, but it was in Santa Domingo. There's more crickets there than you can believe. If a cricket puts one wing up like this and puts another wing out to the side, and there's another cricket over there doing the same thing, if this cricket wiggles this wing, the other one this wing wiggles. And if it wiggles this wing, then this wiggles. And if it wiggles both of them, then both of them wiggle on the other cricket. A cricket can send three completely different signals to another cricket across the room, but you will just hear it as brrr, brrr, brrr. They have extremely complicated communication systems. And when you think he's only got 80,000 neurons in his head, and he is processing signals that are beyond the human capacity to process, there's something going on here. Evolution must have, I mean I sort of agree with many of the people that say evolution goes and jumps. In fact that's my main work. I mean just with the thing I told you about the cochlea, to transform from a cylinder cochlea to a triple concentric helical spiral, working the second time he likes, has to have happened overnight. It couldn't be that it took 20 million years because the ear wouldn't work. It had to work and that's, it had to work overnight. And in fact, I can show it to you a little later on. I don't get too boring, too fast. The distance in a mathematical space from a cylinder to a helix is trivial. One tiny little thing away. So what happened was something instead of growing this way, grew that way. And it's an interesting sort of seed to see how these signal complexities grew. And the other thing that's kind of explicable is not only mother child for human beings, that's very crucial because we're all mammals. But the human ear is almost identical to that of a cat apparently. The cats were the greatest predators of human beings in the early days apparently. And I don't know how they do this, but archaeologists, anthropologists, flossed at the teeth of the old, I don't know, saber-doot tigers, and find there's a human remains between them. It could very well be that the earliest predator, the human ear, tuned itself to hear exactly like what the cat's here. And it's my understanding of the doctors that do operations on ears practice on cats. So it's pretty close. It's not the case that all animals, or all animals, have the same kind of frequency response, but the cats do. And in fact, if you look at the way the human being responds to a specific kind of sound variation, which is called frequency modulation, which would be if I took a rubber band and twanged it and then went back and forth like that, that would essentially be the kind of sound your ear is particularly tuned to. And that's particularly the kind of noise that would be for a lion with a roar. But actually, big cats have now been shown to have a very special adaptation for Inpersonic. For what? Inpersonic. Yeah, could well be. No, it's... Oh, yeah, it's... And that's actually pretty bad, as big cats. Yeah, yeah. Well, yeah. But human ear probably just heard what it did. You know, it could localize cats in space. I mean, it gets very complicated mathematically because if you have something with a constant frequency coming at you, the frequency goes up. So if a cat were roaring and running away from you, the frequency wouldn't go up and you might think he's standing still. But our ear is not fooled by that. See, it's a funny sort of thing. I think it's a little complicated. I don't want to get into it, but there's no simple example I can think of. But suppose I had just a rubber band who was twanging it and going back and forth like that. And now suppose I had a tuning fork and moved it back and forth like that. The frequency would sound like it was going up when I moved the tuning fork towards you and low when it was going away. And it would sound like the frequency was going up when I pulled the rubber band apart and down when I pushed it together. Are those two sounds distinguishable by all animals? And the answer is no, they're not. They're very different to some. And some human beings hear the big difference other ones don't. And I think that's why this people, I don't know this at all. They have perfect pitch and some people have really phenomenal sense. They don't like the sound of the hall because there's too many reverberations or something like that where someone like me would walk in and wouldn't even know there was any difference. I mean, I think we see matching of sensory systems to signals very broadly across the animal kingdom. You know, all sensory systems are matched and there's a lot of talk about whether the use of certain types of colors, certain types of sounds, et cetera are sort of hidden channels are targeted at specific species. So for example, birds, so humans are trichromats. So we're able to see we have three cone classes in our eye, medium wave and short wave, red green, blue vision. But of course birds have an extra super, super short cone. And either a UV cone or an SUV cone. And they also signal using a lot of ultraviolet colors, a lot of UV coloration. And a lot of people in the bird literature have discussed whether that UV might be a hidden channel, right? For non-human primates, catterines and propoys is a whole host of red coloration news. Since we evolved trichromacy and we can actually distinguish reds from greens, from baboons to gelada to mandrels to vervet monkeys to the Gwenons. All these anthropologies are a lot of red coloration. And of course, for their dichromatic mammalian predators, you can't distinguish red from green. So maybe it's a particularly good color to use because it's detectable to other catterine primates. It's detectable to bird predators, but not to other mammalian predators, not to large cats, some things like that. They just wouldn't be able to see a bright red face in a green tree. It would just be all the same color. So you know another thing that we tend to not think about is the subtleties in our non-vocal signaling. I mean, we're talking about colors and different kinds of visual signals. But for many of you in this room, if you're working with people and watching their behaviors, speaking to you, you're paying a lot of attention to what they're doing. I mean, we know that about between 70% and 90% of what we communicate is non-verbal, from micro-momentary movements to the tone in which we say something so I can say, Chris, really nice shoes. We hear the words, we hear the order, we get the basic idea, but what's the meaning of that message? And you're looking at how I'm looking at you and really nice shoes, Chris. You've got a pretty strong affect there. And to me, that is the perfect example of the difference between communication in terms of signaling system that's evolved and language that has meaning, that has a shared cultural elaboration on an understanding. And maybe I oversimplify it, but I see that as if you had written down Chris and I shoes and handed it to him, he'd probably not be as annoyed with you. I really mean I like your shoes. Because the meaning in language is based on a shared understanding of this symbolically referential constructs, whereas what we like to call body language, but your gestural, chemical, visual signaling is intrinsic, is it's our species to some. There are cultural variations on this. But it's still contextual. Even in non-humans, it's contextual. If you show a racist monkey, a female racist monkey during the birth season compared to the mate's season, he treats it differently. If you show an ambiguous face that could be interpreted as being a positive face, it could be interpreted as being a negative face. If you showed that to the same animal, when the animal has just had a vet check versus when the animal hasn't had a vet check, they treat it differently. Because it makes sense. It's a form of cognitive bias, right? It's a emotion mediating attention. If bad things are happening to you and you see something that could be good or bad, if lots of bad things have been happening, maybe it's best to assume this will also be a bad thing. And if lots and lots of good things have been happening and you see something that could be good or bad, maybe it's safe to assume it's probably going to be good. So there's an awful lot of context that goes on. I don't think we're the only ones that add a lot of context to this. You can see the same signal given to the same individual and depending on recent experience, depending on things like this, it can be interpreted very differently. But I imagine, and I fully accept that. I think though that there are certain examples where there's probably very little variation. Alarm calls, indications of extreme aggression, things like that, where there probably isn't so much where selection wouldn't favor variation in response, where selection would favor high specificity in response. So it doesn't, I am sure there are examples, but selection wouldn't favor one to spend a lot of time thinking about what just happened when you hear a predator alarm call. Selection would favor an instant and immediate response. Whether there's any, and it's interesting because the term mental construct or mental cognitive awareness gets tossed around a lot. And in my work, I don't actually need to know what the animals are thinking, to know that they're responding. And from an evolutionary perspective, what the animals are thinking might be the mechanism by which they respond. But for the trait to be favored, they just need to respond in a way that's beneficial. So if an alarm call is given and animals come raining out of the trees and that keeps them from being eaten, that's going to get passed on. Whether they think that there's an eagle or whether they think that trees have suddenly become uninhabitable is a secondary question. I have a question about that. I saw a movie once. My wife's father was a movie maker and I saw a lot of documentaries in my life. And my wife's father was a movie maker and I've seen loads of documentaries and there's this gigantic tree in Africa, I think it is. And the monkeys, whatever they are at the top, could see the eagles first. And the ones in the middle see the pythons first and the ones at the bottom see the black cat. Now each one had a different call. And so the guy at the top goes yelling in German, let's say. And then the guy in the middle speaks French and the guy at the bottom is English. So they recognize each other's calls and you hear them all yelling but each one is their own thing. They are like a trilingual monkeys. Well, there's a whole, like particularly in West Africa. There are these kind of communication networks. So actually not even just monkeys, a range of monkey species and monkeys on the ground and various of it. So you get monkeys and some, I think it's mangebiz on the ground at the various. You share each other's lines. And basically every single species. So they have a different call for a leopard from an eagle from a snake. And every single species recognizes every single of the species specific calls. So if a Diana monkey gives a leopard call, then you'll hear the black and white collar bus monkey start to give it a leopard call. Then you'll hear that the all start to give a little call. So they all recognize all of them. What do they come up with a common word? When I was doing playback experiments. Same thing happens. It happens. Right? And actually that's an even more interesting and bigger leap is when hugely diverged taxes such as primates and birds can actually respond to the alarm calls of the other. And I'm not familiar enough with the literature to know if anyone has any great opinions on whether or not those are learned responses or whether they're evolved responses. But either way it's a pretty impressive. They're learned responses. So if you look through development, individuals are very, very poor when they're young. And they show perceptual narrowing as they get older. So if you take a young vervet monkey, they're given a legal call to any bird. Right. Yeah, but they are predisposed to this. They're predisposed to do it. But they're terrible at it. But it's that's perceptual narrowing. And you can see the range of. We can say the same about our taste buds. We can say the same about our taste buds. There's perceptual narrowing that isn't necessarily based on learning. There's ontogeny is involved in it. But I'm not necessarily convinced that we can distinguish clearly that these are all learned behaviors versus they're innate behaviors. And probably like almost everything, there's a combination of the two. Where you've got an innate predisposition that is then affixed through ontogeny. As a little monkey grows up and is making wrong calls. Everyone ignores them. No, but they were like a day and they all say, I think he's not pulling our leg. Or is it a slow thing? They just show maybe. They just narrow in through development. And they do tend to go from all birds to all large birds to all large birds. But when the rest of the people decide to fall out of the tree, because if this guy's calling bird every other day. They're calling people. They just ignore them when they're doing it. They tend to ignore the jouve and all of the jouve and all of the other things. And then they'll look at the juvenile and they'll go back to feeding. But one of the interesting things we're talking about, the heterospecific responses, I do playback experiments in the species that I study to look at responses. And one of the hardest thing I had was that I would playback the eagle call of blue monkeys to a group of blue monkeys to look at their response. And then every other species in the forest would start responding. It would just throw everything off. It was really interesting, but I wasn't looking at their responses. I mean, animals are going to live or die by the information they can take in. I mean, the way animals have to learn what to eat. I mean, they're going to learn fast. And whether it's learned or somehow there's some hardwiring that it's been selected for. I mean, you've got to figure out what information, you know, what the contingencies are basically. And I think one of the things that was very compelling about some of the work we heard in vervet monkeys was something called the audience effect. Where, you know, you might argue, well, the vervet is hardwired or she's hardwired. There's a martial eagle up there and it's going to just do this emotive call because first people thought it was just these were just emotive react responses. They weren't what's actually they didn't call them referentical. They called them semantic signals, meaningful signals. So they weren't fixed action patterns at least, right? Right. Right. So yeah, exactly. And there was some control, which is a big thing to think about that animals can control what they're doing. And so the vervets, if it's an ice, if it's a single vervet and that martial eagle is there, that snake is there, they don't call. They only call it there's an audience if there are other vervets around. So that's interesting and very important when you think about it. But it could just be that they're only aroused to that level when there are other individuals around too. I mean, you can always send, I mean, it's Morgan's canon, right? You can always sort of up your cats. Yeah. What about the cute? Well, some of their alarm calling their sentinels and they stand up and they have jobs and they, you know. Right. I think I recently sat in a room full of people who looked at animal communication from a psychological perspective. And I sat there and discussed my work from an evolutionary perspective. And there was a lot of confusion. But we worked it all out. But I think that that's one of the things that from an evolutionary perspective, we look so much at is this behavioral pattern or is this trait adaptive in any way. And the mechanism by which it becomes adaptive isn't necessarily part of the equation in terms of is it adaptive. And I personally, when I read some of the literature, I see a lot of people wanting to make cognitive, draw cognitive conclusions based on behavior. And so when that, and I think that was, I mean to their credit, Cyfarth and Chaney actually, you know, pulled back and the whole functionally referential took over for semantic. But the very first thing anyone thought when they said, oh, they use a different call for eagle and snake. And the animals respond as if there's an eagle or a snake when they hear that call in the absence of the predator. We immediately went to a linguistic cognitive explanation. And I think what James was alluding to is that there are so many more parsimonious evolutionary explanations that don't demand that degree of cognitive awareness. It's not saying that they aren't there. And I think people have heard me say things like this, suggesting, well, there is no animal. Absolutely not. I just don't think we've necessarily proved it simply by seeing, when an animal does something, we can't necessarily assign the same mental state that we would have when we did the same behavior. We just say they did it and we'll have to try to figure out what they're thinking. Have any of you ever watched hunting spiders? Mm-hmm. Like Porsche or something like Porsche? You watch this animal which you typically would want to step on. Watch it hunt. So these are animals that actually hunt other spiders. When you look at what their actions are and they're basically figuring out where from what position they're going to jump onto their prey, how they're going to do it, and you watch them and you're going, wait a minute. They use acoustic camouflage. They'll wait till there's wind blowing and it'll shake the web of their prey so that the prey can't necessarily detect them on the web. And you're going, this is a spider. Is a spider thinking? Right. It's the same with, I mean, some of the most complicated communication at all occurs in the social insights. Yeah, bee dances. The honeybee wiggle dances are phenomenally complex where depending on how they, when the honeybee gets back to the nest after finding a food source, depending on how they dance in the nest, the angle and for how long it tells exactly the distance, the angle you should fly with respect to the sun and for how. So do we agree that that's language? Absolutely. You do? I don't. And one reason I will say it's fundamentally different. Well, again, I would just want for the record, we still have not defined language. So I can say it's not language, but I won't tell you what I think language is. But one of the big differences is that you can raise a bee in isolation or novice bee, a juvenile bee that reaches maturity and stick it in with the hive and it will do the dance the same way as its fellows. Not right away. Are you sure? All right. I will bow to your experience then. My reading of it was that they were... You know that bees go through a whole series of changes in their lives to adapt to different roles in the hive? No, absolutely. There's take any old bee and stick it in there and it's going to do what you want it to do. True. My reading of it was that novice bees were still capable of both interpreting and producing the correct waggle dance, the correct nectar dance. They've been put into the right state of mind. But whereas... I'm challenging. Bring it. But there's no... But I'm not aware of any human that has ever been raised in isolation that no matter what his state of mind could ever start speaking a language that they had not been taught. So the... And this goes back to your friend Nom Chomsky. I mean, the capacity for language is very different from the language. I might wrap you up to the bee hive. You wouldn't do too well. You would do a very poor job of... At most things, actually. Yes. But I think one of the things that really distinguishes at least my view of language versus inherent or involved or inherited communication modalities of communication is that language... Not language the capacity, but language the... Is there another word? What would we call French, an example of a language rather than language capacity? Well, language in the field I'm in is very specific, defined thing. And all these concepts of meaning play no role. Right. All these concepts are what? Meaning. There's no particular reason to assume it has meaning. But it happens to when we use it. But in the theory of Chomsky, that communication is a secondary role for language. And in fact, what it is, it's a series. It's just a very complicated series of strings of symbols that people recognize and they know some of them are good and some of them are bad. You know, when you stop to think about what a person knows, these are standard examples. If you went to a major library in New York City and opened up any book, I don't care what it is, and put your finger on a page and took that sentence and wrote it down, how many more books in the library would you have to read till you came to that very same sentence again? And the answer is, it's not in any other book. If it's 20 words long, it's not in any other book. Now where in the world is there anything that human beings can do that they can immediately recognize a 20 word sentence and tell you whether it's grammatical English or not when there's a bazillion trillion gadillion of them? And the thing is it's a very odd capacity. It's probably related to the concepts of numbers. And it turns out every human being is a prodigy for that particular kind of symbolic logic. But the people that are particularly good at this unfortunately tend not to be articulate. And in particular Alan Turing and people, you know, it's very difficult to understand what they have. But it is very odd to see that human beings have this odd ability all around the world with no particular instruction. Look, suppose I say, I don't want to give you too many linguistic things, but suppose I say he is tall, he is not tall, he isn't tall. And I can say, you are tall, you are not tall, you aren't tall. And I can say, I am tall, I am not tall, I am not tall. Now none of you is going to go home and say, well, he's a professor and he said ampeh. So I'm going to start saying, I am tall. It's not going to work. Ampeh became ain't in English. Why? Nobody has any idea. But why don't people use ampeh? Nothing wrong with it. And why did they pick up ain't? And then once they picked up I ain't, they would say you ain't and he ain't and they put it everywhere. And then in some dialects you can say, I have not a book, you can say I ain't a book. So it moved from to be to have. There's very strange generalities. If you take the word himself, John saw himself. Everybody knows what it means. Shakespeare never used any reflexives. This came in in 1600. You can date it precisely. But then you said she likes herself and two dialects came off. One said, I like myself and the other one, I like me self. See since himself was the first one, you don't say his self, circularly. Well you should say, I like me self, but you don't. Why? I don't know. It's just strange. There was nobody saying you should say this and not say this. There were huge, I mean in the United States there were huge arguments as to whose dictionary was the best dictionary. And the Miriam Webster won because he gave a free copy to every editor of every newspaper in the United States. That's actually not it. And nothing to do with academia. And the other went to Columbia, didn't give anything away so nobody uses the Columbia spellings or anything. They all think it's weird. I mean, it's not a spell. They didn't know how to make money, that's what they do. But it's a funny sort of thing. But language is a very formal kind of thing when you stop to think of what you know. If I gave you a big long sentence, everybody could correct it and everybody has razor-sharp intuitions about these things. And take a word like eke out. I can say I have a student that just barely ekes out of living and I can't say, but he's been ekeing for years. He's eke for 30 years and now he's trying to work it out. Now how in the world do you know that you can't say eke? You can say eke out. Your mother didn't tell you, come on. Nobody said always say eke out, kids, if you're saying eke. It's just something. It's some pattern to English that has nothing to do with that sound, right? I'm right. You're saying that somehow there's inherent rejection of the phonetic... Yes, inherent pattern to English. We don't know what it is. It's not acceptable. So if you raised someone in a cage in Borneo and taught them this, but then they'd never heard the word eke. And if they heard ekeing, they would say... Well, the good problem with teaching the eke, man, it's up to gels. But take the... Go back to the one that's really hard, the amped. No, I don't think. If I used amped and told everybody it'd be a dollar if you use it too, it's not going to catch on. Well, not now because it's not socially acceptable. That's not as much more than it's not socially acceptable. It's not a pattern. You've got to remember you sent the syntax. It's some syntactic pattern. Look, I'm not tall. And I can say, I am... You aren't tall and you're not tall, but I can't say you're tall and do a double contraction. I bet you could say that if that became socially acceptable, it'd be fine. You do that all the time. We develop new... Look at rap. I'm from North Carolina. You should hear what I'm talking about. You could make up anything you want and sell people that you're going to have to use it. But you think language is deterministic? Well, I think it's like mathematics. I think nobody's going to come up and tell me there's a new integer between three and four and nobody's ever seen before. It's not going to happen. And language is very much like that. I think I'm not sure that I fully agree with you, but I do think there are rhythms in... I mean, human language has this bimodal rhythm. This bimodal rhythm and all human languages have a rhythm of between three and eight hertz, which is the... The... The... The... The... The... The... The... The... The... The... The... The... The... The... The... The... The... That's very, very unique like nonhuman primates don't show that bimodal rhythm in any type of... So that doesn't mean that they can... In your language? Right. No, no. But I'm... I'm just saying that whether I agree with that or not, I do agree that there are rhythms to human... Oh, yeah. It's a human. It's a human... Well, there's a... There's a Macaque study. So since you shot down my v-argument, I'll bring up Macaque study and hopefully you haven't read that too. You're down to challenge that... There was a Macaque study that... that I'm one of those people who really get very uncomfortable when people start talking about captive studies, because I do all field work. But I'm really glad that the information is available to us. But they raised macaques in captivity without ever, I think they took them from their birth mother at one hour old. And they were never exposed to the vocalizations of their own species. And by adulthood, they had developed the entire, we already discussed, repertoire, whether or not it was a real thing. But they had developed the entire vocalizations and used all the vocal signals. I'm not sure if they tested whether or not they used them in appropriate context. But they used them all. And again, to go back to your friend in Borneo in the cage, there's no human that could ever develop any of the known living languages without ever being exposed to them. They are fundamentally different things. But I think where things get interesting is that. Try birds. Well, Ocines. There are different taxa that show different degrees of learned versus not learned and having these windows and all these different things. But I think one of the things that's really interesting is that my understanding, which is extremely limited about human linguistics, is that, and this may be a horrible simplification, is that language, the spoken language, or the written language, or any sort of symbolic language that we use as a species, reflects our cognition. We have this inherent, maybe it's not inherent, but we have thoughts in our head for one of a better term. And then language is a way we use to express that. And I think that as a result, when we look at non-humans when they vocalize or gesture or any other way, we assume that there must be something similar going on. And I don't know if that's true or not. I don't have an opinion that's not. But I think Diana does. I think I do. I want to jump in here. Because this is one of my favorite subjects right now. Because, again, you go back to ancient times. And the idea was that language and speech was inextricably linked. Ratio and ratio is what they talked about. And that because we thought that no other animals were communicating, or they didn't do anything that we could recognize as anything like our speech, even though birds are singing and dolphins are doing things and bees are doing it, we didn't know enough about that. We made the assumption, and it's continued to be an assumption that other species are devoid of thought. So I think one of the things that's really important to realize is that the brains of most animals are composed of the same building blocks. There's nothing that different about it. The organization may be really different than the number of neurons, even the cell bodies, may be different sizes. Elephants and dolphins actually have bigger neuronal bodies than do many other animals. And we don't really know very much about even our brains now. But we've tended to make this assumption. It's almost like a religious or cosmological assumption that we are different from the rest of the animal world. We're at the top of the pinnacle, and everybody's below us. And nobody else is thinking, we're the only ones who think we're the only ones who communicate using language. And language, the word language, comes from the tongue. We have a tongue. We think about speech more than any other body language, as we said before. And as we're finding more and more details, as we're discovering more details about other animal systems, we see that there is more going on than we ever thought before, behaviorally, acoustically, in terms of sensory systems. And I just think we're kind of pompous at assuming that nobody else is out there thinking. The question used to be, do other animals think? And I think the question has shifted. And I think it's no longer a question do they think. It's how do they think? How do they think? Yeah. Or how do they communicate? One thing on that. Most of the, I mean, I've worked in a lot of this stuff long before I got into linguistics. And most of the people that worked with chimpanzees and things treated them very nicely. The Georgia Institute of Technology one time decided they would put a monkey in an overwhelmingly deprived situation. And instead of giving it a banana, if it got the right answer, it would loosen the cage or open a window or let it breathe a little bit. And they tried, like crazy, to teach the animal what's called grammatical relations. No animal, apparently, can differentiate. John touched Mary from Mary touched John. This is also across the board in all web browsers. You could be rich if you could figure out a way for a web browser to do what's called thematic relations. And you can't. You can do it for trivial cases, but it doesn't work in most in all cases. And so what happens is they were never able to teach an animal to differentiate John kissed Mary from Mary kissed John. And they did it by having a, Mary was a triangle and John was a square or something. And they would try to get it so that they would put the things up. Now some animals could learn verbs, like chimpanzees could learn verbs, like kiss, touch, and things like that. Most animals can't learn a sign for verb for a verb. But every child in the world, immediately, from the time they're born, knows it's not his fault. And it's somebody else's fault. And they use grammatical relations all the time. He hit me. I didn't hit him. He hit me first. And the thing is, no animal, even with all the attempts they do to teach them grammatical relations, it doesn't work. And this is a huge thing right now, because I don't know if this is true, but it seems to be the entire web is going to be English. And they're going to have, when you put a question in in Spanish, it'll translate it into English and answer it. But in English, if you say, John took Mary the book. Mary has the book. But in German, if you say, Johann Haakmaritas Booked in Omen, it means he took it away from her. So now, when you're doing translations from one language to another, you have to know all the grammatical relations in all of these languages. She gets to be very passionate. They have to challenge you on that one. Yeah. It's important for the other. Thinking about this idea of translation, and then in school, are you not a writer? And then, what you did was you decided to then multiply the English system work to study the language that was traditionally the model language of from my culture, the language that they were drawn to by my parents. Yeah. Speak that language, learn about the language at the top. So at the age of six people, I said, well, let me see what that level one was just to say. And it was a word. I thought that I would go to English, these are two completely different concepts. But in that language, this model language of mine is the same word. What is that word? Pray and rest it. So I said, oh, so that's what they're doing when they're crying. And the idea of the passive resting, and I said, it wasn't really active. If I tell them, go out on the other hand, get something done, I'd go to that. And then this breakthrough in terms of understanding my culture. And the activity and the identity help things get done. And to me, as a writer, I'm interested in the organization of my thoughts and how, what's that next word? What's that next word? What's that next thing that we're writing? That the most exciting thing that we're writing is the next question. It's the most important one. The most important thing is the most important kind of direction. But what's interesting is, here now, looking at the language, the mother of the tongue is now giving ideas that are seen to be very contradictory, resting and praying. But it's a wonderful, kind of great thing to me as a writer to start looking at other languages. But who is about where you go? Well, each language has its own little city of synchronies to be much more mundane than prayer and resting. But suppose you want to ask, we're interested in painting something. We're interested in painting a wall. The web browsers will soon have dialogues with you rather than tell you. So if I said I want to paint a wall, I suppose I could go into a paint store here and they'd give me wall paint. But if in German, the word for von, here that's a von and a mower is outside of the house. But the word wall in English is both of them. So it could very well be, if I'm dealing with some German guy, he'd say, is the wall inside the house or outside the house? Which is not something he might ask me down here because he'd give me a different paint, but it doesn't make any sense to ask, I want to paint a wall. And there's words in different languages that they'd have to ask you a lot of context. I mean, the farthest out one I know of, some American Indian languages, most languages make a difference between I, you and me and the singular and the plural. But some American Indian languages make a difference to whether you're standing up or sitting down when you talk to me. And that's because the chiefs, I don't know what it's all about, were something like this. The chiefs never ate until everybody else ate. And so if I'm standing up and talking to you, that means I'm higher than you in the social order. And so I can imagine somebody would say, John said to Mary, what time is it? The guy'd say, was John standing up? What was Mary standing up or sitting down? And this is going to happen to you in the future as Google tries to get data out of other kinds of things because in some, we have a student from a, I won't mention the culture, but it's a culture where he cannot come in and just say, Ray, would you please sign this? He has to say, how's your wife? How's your dog? How's your child? How, what are you going to do later? And I say, what do you want? But they have to ask all these questions about your family before you can get down to things. And it's very interesting because that's a cultural thing. It's learned. That's certainly learned, I should think. Ray just said something, though. I just want to set a record straight here because I don't think that this idea that no other animal can learn anything grammatical through training, they may not use grammatical structures. We don't know enough to say they do where they don't. But the study I think you're referring to was by Dwayne Rumbaugh, one glosser filed, and Gil, is that the one? He'll be mentored, so long as I'm doing it. Yeah, and that, as the study actually I'm pretty familiar with. And what they did is they took a chimpanzee named Lana and they trained her to use an interactive computer system. And she was trained to order, to either accept or not accept grammatical sentences. And they were either grammatical or non grammatical, she actually could do it. That's black, she came up with it. Yeah, it's lexigrams, and she actually did it. She was trained to do it and to reject non grammatical. It was a science paper. And then she actually used it in some novel ways to manipulate and get one of the trainers into this very sterile environment that you described as extremely sterile. And then years later, Lou Herman out the University of Hawaii, and again, it was a fairly rigid system, but he actually trained dolphins using food to respond to a set of rules. And they were take hoop to window or take ball to hoop. And they had to do the correct behavior. So animals can be trained to do it. We don't know if they do that in their own forms, but they have that capacity. So I think, I don't think it's completely accurate to say that no other animal shows it. And then the other point I just want to make, since we're talking about animal communication, and language is that we used Chomsky and others have argued that we have these special syntactic structures, some module in our brain, and that propels us to learn language with very little effort, and that no other animals do it. So if you're a human, very young children can distinguish between paw and paw and paw, and well, that was evidence that we have these special structures. But guess what? Other animals do the same thing. You can play birds, and you can play gerbils, and other animals, paw, paw and paw. And they can distinguish those sounds too. So the view has moved, I think, in my world, at least, what I've learned, that we certainly have varniki and broca's area in the brain for production and comprehension. But this idea of processing sounds that happen to be language sounds may be much more due to general mechanisms for acoustic perception. But they're also very speechless. And a lot of the studies, if you did the reverse of that, I always have a quizzical opinion of tests of non-human animal cognition when they give them animal tests. Because I saw the study where they had this puzzle, and they got a four-year-old human girl, and they said, how long will it take her to do the puzzle? And she figured out the puzzle, and she got the treat out of it. And then they got a bunch of chimpanzees through, and eventually they did that. And they said, ah-ha, we figured out that chimpanzees are about as intelligent as a four-year-old human girl. And I said, stick that four-year-old human girl out in the forest and see how intelligent she looks in a chimpanzee context. And I think that's, so for example, we've done the same studies with non-human primates in terms of their ability to distinguish what are acoustically, practically identical. Green did a study on the cacks where he kept seeing these different responses to what he thought was the same call. And then using spectrographic analysis, he found that there was this minute difference that we couldn't perceive acoustically, but that the macaques were responding to categorically. And so in the same way that people, even among humans, people have a heart that lived in Thailand for a while, and people, it's tonal language. And I never could understand the difference, but to them it was very categorical. We're in the same species. So imagine the differences, how each species is genetically and physiologically tuned to the specificity of their own communication system. And when tests are fairer and more appropriate, they typically do much better. So there was a whole host of studies in research monkeys that looked at pointing as a gesture, where the human observer pointed towards something, and then they tried to see whether the research monkey would look, was capable of following the attention of another individual. And they didn't get any results, of course. But of course, research macaques don't point with their arms. And actually when they started doing it with gaze and with heads and things, then they started to do much, much better. Because they are actually interested in where other research macaques are looking. But of course, it's not a very fair test to show how they point. Just to come back to your point on the brain mechanisms of some of these things, I think I broadly agree that a lot of the central structures are the same. There are some of the, and this comes back to what you were just saying before, some of the properties of human language that we do understand, like the bi-modal rhythm and stuff. We do understand kind of the mechanisms that that's a coupled oscillation between neurons and the brain line. And that's pretty much a unique human thing as far as you're aware of which. And that gives human language that unique rhythm cognitively. I'd like to come back to what you said. Yeah, you said the poor monkeys in the cages, but they weren't feeding them very well. And they had to do with a minimal thing to even get some water. It wasn't that they just did grammatical sentences. They were trying to teach them the difference between John Kist, Mary, and Mary Kist John. But in children, very young ones, even, that extends far beyond that. For instance, suppose there was a big ink stain on the floor and somebody comes in and says, who put it there? I can't say I confess he did it. I can say, it doesn't make any sense. I can say I confess I did it. I can accuse him. I can say I confess he did it. But now suppose it's in my class and the dean comes in and says, professor, who put that ink stain? I can say I confess it was one of my students. Then I can point to him. Now suppose the president of the college comes in. And he says, who put that ink stain there? I can say I confess the dean did it. See, as long as there's a hierarchy of people, you can confess for all sorts of people if you're vaguely related to them. Now take something else. Suppose I walk out of the building here and some woman comes up and says, I just want to van Klyburne competition and piano. I can't say I'm very proud of you because I don't have anything to do with it. Now if she had been one of my students years ago and I'd say, oh, why don't you pick up the piano? Linguistics is dead. And she went to the piano. Then I can say I'm very proud of you. But I can't be proud of somebody. I don't even know who they are. And I can't confess for a large number of people. But in every, I don't know if this is true, but we tried it out on dozens of languages. The word confess is the same in every language of the world. That's what it tells you. There's something about who did it. And the other thing is there's a word for blame because the concept of agency to a child is supposed to be your kid and you still live on the floor. You said, who did it? The kid will say, I did it, but he made me do it. So it's not his fault. It's transference of agency or something. But very concrete. This is after a certain age, up to their three or four, they're not even capable of having very mental states at all. Yeah, it's a belief test. But it's one of the very first things that's emergent in an intelligent brain. And it's not in any computer. You can't program this. It's impossible to even think of how you program it. And it doesn't seem to happen in any animals. We don't know what's happening in the brains of other animals, though, because we have no way to know. Yes, it's like bugs. What can do is observe behavior. So you can look at some of the work that Franz Zivall has done with primates and look at this idea of inequity and think about what's fair. I mean, you can do two tasks. And if Chris has those two tasks, and he gives you a cappuccino for doing that. And I get that crappy glass of water. I'm going to be pretty ticked off that I didn't get the cappuccino. And you can see primates will also feel that way. So the Great Apes will. The monkeys may not, but the Great Will Monkeys do as well. So they have a sense of inequity. They're animals that seem to show empathy. They don't talk about it like we do in a way that we can understand. Maybe they do communicate it some ways, but we don't understand that it gets us to the point of us being blind and deaf to what these other animals are doing. Because we can talk all about what we're doing here is we're still talking about human language. We understand human language. We're humans. We're talking about animal community, other animal systems. What do we really know about those systems when we can decode them? And I think that's why putting in an adaptive framework is a good place to start. Even if the ultimate objective is to understand cognition, understand the way of thinking, I think putting in an adaptive framework first sort of levels the field. Because again, to go back to that poor little girl that I wanted to throw in the forest with the chimpanzees to prove that that intelligence equation wasn't appropriate is that animals evolve within the social and ecological context of their species, or sorry, species of all within their ecological and social niches. And so if a particular trait wasn't beneficial or wasn't adaptive, we have this sort of hierarchy. I think humans have this sort of sense of, well, we say words like intelligence in where humans have superior or inferior intelligence. And I just think we have species that have adapted appropriate strategies for dealing with their ecosystems and their social context. And if language or the ability to communicate through complex and tactical structures was never necessitated or was never selected for, we would likely see its absence. And I think one of the things, just because I'm talking about keep going. One of the things I noticed that we haven't mentioned is that when we tend to distinguish between human communication and we call it and we say language, and non-human communication, which we, you know, vocalization, whatever. But what about crying and screaming and laughing and smiling and all the innate blushing? That's true. It's right up James's alley. He studies coloration in his face. It's not that he blushes his life. He might blushing. Now he's blushing. He's blushing. Yeah. But a lot of communication, but no words. Right. There's an enormous amount of what I consider non-linguistic communication evolved inherited traits in terms of human communication that is utterly outside of the scope of linguistics and language. And when I look at non-human communication systems, they tend to appear to me a lot more similar to things like laughing and crying and screaming and smiling and blushing. Then they do to Shakespeare. So you said something before that made an assumption about why we're sitting here and that was they were interested in cognition? I thought because Beth and I did us. But I thought we were talking about animal communication. Well, and actually, it's, well, I think that's, and maybe I'm creating a strong man here, but I think that a lot of the communication literature that I've read and I tend to be very focused on communication from an evolutionary perspective. I think there is a tendency to inappropriately and often unintentionally conflate a cognitive mechanism for a major or evolutionary explanation. But I think it's, so I think that that happens a lot. But I think another thing that happens is that people who are interested in cognition look at communication. So in the same way that humans infer the cognition of fellow humans based on self-reporting. So we use communication to understand what one another is thinking. I think part of it's a terminology problem because people in animal communication talk about signalism receivers. So you have some sort of signal or sender. Senders and receivers. You have a sender and a receiver. And you communicate between the sender of receiver and then the receiver somehow changes their behavior. So as soon as you have senders, you have a message that the sender has constructed, packaged up, and sent to the receiver. So there's this informational package somehow that's a product of the sender. Now I'm happy with informational constructs in animal communication, but I think there are products of receivers, not a product of senders. So if an individual, if I do anything right now, what it communicates depends on you. It depends on what you extract and perceive from what I'm doing. I can say all the words I like. I can make all the gestures I want. I can do everything I want now. But the information that's in my communication that goes to you as the receiver is not a construct of me at all. It's a construct of you. So I think that the whole, I'm happy with information being an extractive amount of more communication, but I think it needs to be as long as we're talking about it as a construct of receivers rather than. So I think senders and signalers and words like this are unhelpful, because they give the idea that somehow the message is a product of me rather than a product of you. And the mistake I think that people make without study communication theories, that there's some inherent meaning in the message is what you're saying. There's nothing in the message itself. It's how it's perceived. It's in the meaning. It's in the sense what you're saying. But a message can be extracted from it. That's it to the receiver. But there's not an inherent message there that you can objectively look at. It's in them. So because of that, some people would argue that, therefore, we should just cut information as a concept out of communication. Look, information isn't really. Don't talk to me. They just want to talk to me out here. They're in the round up. The information can't be contained within animal communication because it's not a thing that's packaged up by senders. But for me, as long as the perceiver is able to extract something from something that they've observed and have a reduction in uncertainty about the state of the world, which is a true definition of information. I can understand an weaver type definition. Then I don't see how can they not have been informed in some way as a perceiver? Because I, well, it's going to get long. But I think one of them is recently. But I failed miserably then. I don't expect to do any better now. But I actually had to pull that out of my introduction chapter, my whole diatribe against the information theory and animal communication. It's a question of interpretation. And I think there's different uses of the word information. I think most lay people use it as sort of synonymous with data. So you're wearing a blue shirt. Well, that's a piece of information. And then mathematics and linguistics. Right. Well, that's a function of view. Because if you can't see blue, then you don't know. So there's nothing to do with me. Right. There's nothing inherent in it. But if you weren't wearing a blue shirt, I know. We wouldn't be talking about. But interesting that you talk about the reduction of uncertainty, which is an inherent, I take to believe and I was wrapped on the knuckles for this firmly. But I still take to be a cognitive state that uncertainty is a state of awareness to some degree. And so information theory in a way that's used in communication is really talking about a predictability or a state. And I think a lot of communication doesn't necessarily have anything to do with predictability or state. So you wouldn't think that a B drone that's just seen a waggle dance is now capable of totally flying straight to a food source that they were completely unaware of previously has obtained any information about the state of the world from the waggle dance. It depends on how we construe the term information. So I mean, what narratives? You really don't think that gained information. I know. I told you, I would lose this fight. I would keep fighting it in one of these days. I'll figure out how to articulate it. So what's the word we use other than information? If you would like to look at this after my dissertation that I pulled out, I've said that signal content actually is a useful construct. And the way I define it, and some would say that there's really no difference. And I use a rather sophomoric example. But if a tree falls in the woods and no one's there to hear it, does it make a sound? Absolutely it makes a sound. The laws of physics say it makes a sound. And the weight of the tree, the angle of its trajectory, how hard it hits the ground, what's on the ground underneath it, will determine characteristics of that sound, how the amplitude, the frequency, the degree of crackle, or whatever you want, however you want to describe that sound. If no one's there to hear it, there's no information gained. There's no uncertainty changed. But there is content in that, just to use the analogy of a signal, the sound that that tree makes, has characteristics that relate to the event. So in the same way, my voice has in heron as indexical properties about my body size. So if I hollow out, there will be formants and all sorts of things you can measure, and it will relate to my skeletal length. But if none of you are here to hear it, there's no difference in your understanding of my body size. But it doesn't take away from the fact that that signal is. But we can distinguish potential information from perceived information. Of course. I mean, it's fine. I think it's the same. That's what we talked about. But then to go just to push that a little bit further, if in a linguistic model, if I were to say to you, there's a person outside with a birthday cake just for you, that would be information. It'd be pretty much. I think it's afternoon before camera time. I've been told that before. I think it's very important that we have an audience with information. But we really want to hold that question. Oh. We're going to go for about another five-time. We should probably not end on information theory, because everyone will end saying that James' character really just lost it there at the end. But the one thing I would distinguish, I think, is that I have softened my objection to this somewhat. I think the distinguishing characteristic is that from a human linguistic and cognitive framework, we process information very specifically. We think there's a birthday cake out there, and that will change. Now I'm no longer uncertain as to what's waiting for me. And now my behavior will be based on my conscious awareness of that outside thing. When we look at non-human responses, there can be evolved responses that have absolutely nothing to do with a conscious awareness of anything that was related to the signal itself. And so I think probably, as you said earlier, one of the problems is terminology. So depending on how we want to define information, I don't necessarily have a problem with it. But what I have a problem with it is the assumption that animal responses have to be based on some sort of awareness, necessarily, of the quote, information in the signal. I actually don't think most people start there, because I'm a cognitive psychologist. I think we look at animal signals and try to look at, when we talk about, you can look at communication from the order in which the signals occur, the structure of the signals, how they're used pragmatically in terms of how do they function. And then when you look at those things, there are times at which you say, I think I'm seeing something systematic here. And then you can then design an experiment to test it further. But I don't really know that many scientists who have looked at signals that animals produce and say, oh, there's some heavy-duty cognitive underlying thought there without doing some pretty hard studies. I mean, people may stay. There's too much in the alarm call. Yeah, you should read the primary people. The primary people. The bystander in search. They get worked up about it in the primary. The alarm calls. But I'm talking about the other. I'm talking about outside of that. With the birds song. With whale song. I don't think people are really putting all that heavy cognitive stuff in there. I think that's one of the problems here, is that when you were before describing this whole movement or the distinguishing between communication and cognition, I think one of the problems is that, first of all, I think some of these arguments are basically cul-de-sacs, they're going nowhere. They're infatuations with our own self. And cognition is a projection of our own abilities onto these other systems. And so you're never going to find it because we'll always argue about whether it is or it isn't. We'll come up with new terms and whatnot. So the question is, what are we talking about? Are we talking about do animals communicate? What level, what depths do they communicate? I think we impose a value system so that a Porsche, when Stem Wilcox actually shows these animals look like they're thinking, and they are anticipating what's going to happen in the future in the past, we go, oh, but it's a spider. But if we have a non-human primate, we go through all these elaborate expectations, et cetera, et cetera. So we impose a value system on it. If it has cognition, it must be greater value. Wales, primates, greater value. And I think that is a really false paradigm for looking at life. Because any way you look on this planet, there are just amazing things going on that have gone through the evolutionary process that we can't really explain. How can you, any of us here, understand, imagine being in a system where the animals are working over 100,000 hertz bandwidth. They have three simultaneous sound production mechanisms. They can perceive sound through multiple channels at the same time. You and I can't even appreciate it. And yet we're trying to make a distinction of whether it has cognition or doesn't have cognition. Do you mean different sensory systems? Hmm? No. Within the same sensory system. Auditorium. Sitations will be receiving signals through multiple places in their heads. But then is it all, does it all feed in through the same kind of sensory system or such? Well, eventually, presumably it ends up somewhere in auditory cortex. I'm asking because there's, I think there's interesting questions here about what we consider to be universities multisensory in communication. Because we have quite specific, we have quite specific sensory systems. So if I see you and I hear you talking at the same time, I have my auditory and visual cortex, et cetera, et cetera. So there's plenty of animals, insects, for example, have a completely separate system for detecting the same chemical signal that was sent through the air, then contacts came out reception, right? So then do we define a signaling modality on the basis of its production? I get some vocal signal that's sent through the C. Or if there's more completely separate multiple sensory systems for detecting it, does that then become a multisensory signal? Here's my question. But in the incitations, it sounds like that. So they have, it's just actually one sensory system, but just multiple ways of detecting it. They have basically receptors into the physical entity called their body. They are coming through different parts of their skull. And I almost want to, this is sort of challenging, but I almost want to say, well, does it really matter if we define that they have a multisensory system? I think it does matter, yeah. Why does that matter? Because multisensory communication is different. Well, who cares if it's different? I think it's different cognitively, functionally, it evolves differently. So does that mean we place a different value on that system that has multisensory? No, but I think of it somehow inflates ourselves and says, oh, wow, we found something that's more complicated than us? Why can't you just enjoy the fact that there's an animal that works up to 220 kilohertz, right, that has received through its jaw, receives through the back of the head, receives through it, right? I mean, I can appreciate that from a static sense, but as a scientist, I'm also interested in studying it and asking questions or something. But also, they're visual, they're tactile. They should, the general, if we are. And actually, we've had a lot of communications. Stations aren't very visual. They are. Yeah, yeah. They change their positions. They have a visual phobia that works in the air and in the water. Nice to see you. We've talked a lot today about human language, for example, and you started touching on gesture. But actually, human language is completely multisensory from the start. It's impossible to make the words that we make without concomitant movements of the lips. And this, from looking at people, we get a much, much better understanding of what they're saying. Even if you can only see the lips, if you cut the rest of the head off, everything, if you just see their lips, you get a much better understanding. And this visual signal, following the lips, is not something that's piggyback to on, that humans have evolved a vocal communication system. And then we've added on a bit of visual signal. It's right from the start. The visual signal of watching the lips and the vocal signal coming into the ears are integrated at the very, very first step of cortical processing. And it's the same in non-human primates, as well as in humans. And your dolphins don't have any facial gestures, right? No, but they have body positions. They have body positions. But most of them can't even see each other when the community can see this. Right. Well, that's a species I study. They have a series of what are called loud calls, which I think is rather uninformative. They have calls that can be heard almost a kilometer away. And then they have calls that can barely be heard more than a few meters away. And they use them in different contexts and presumably selection has favored them for having different functions. So there are, I think, so what James was saying there. And clearly with the whales, we're looking over 1,000 kilometers of the ability to communicate, the ability to produce and perceive a signal with no other, with no additional information, no other modality to accompany it, no other visual or gestural or chemical, et cetera. And then we have others that are evolved within this very close multi-dimensional or multi-modality space. And I just think that selection favors them for different reasons in different ways. But they're probably built on some fundamental underlying foundation of perception and reception and then diverged over time. Great. Thank you guys for just a few minutes. I don't know. I don't know. I'm not going to be honest. I was asking John and Dwight, who would have been asking to rock for us to be the first to speak? Really? Because I think he's going to yell at me. You might be yelling at me. Now he's the young vervet that needs to be. I'm going to try to yell at him. What I wanted to clarify was this. You said that the understanding is created in the receiver. Well, that's true unless the sender and the receiver have previously agreed a set of signals. If the sender and the receiver have previously agreed what the various signals mean, then it's the sender who constructs the semantics and not the receiver. So if I have a very simple system, which is to tell you to turn on a light switch or turn it off, and we agree before that when I raise my arm like this, you turn it off. And when I do this, you turn it off. Then I'm the one who's giving meaning to the signal. Now that's important because we may fallaciously have assumed that built into each of us is some standard set, which is biologically determined. And therefore we have agreement built into us before. And therefore when an animal sends out a signal, it's the sender who is generating the information and not the receiver, namely if we're all hardwired, if animals were hardwired to respond to it when the tail goes up, there is something hardwired in an animal to say, I know what that means, not know in the cognitive sense, but to know the response. Then indeed it would be the reverse of what you were saying. So I just wanted us to be careful about the fact that we're giving up on information theory as it was originally created by Shannon, was exactly this notion to have this prearranged set of signals from which you are choosing. And so if you're going to use the word information theory, that does presuppose this. And so I think you do need to worry about that. That's right. No, I was just going to say, so if you look at basic communication books for human communication, you see these diagrams. And we talk about a transactional model. So you've got sender, receiver, both being both, because it's a highly dynamic system. You're sender, receiver at the same time. And then the meaning, the sender has an understanding, like you're saying, they have an idea of what this message is in their head. And the receiver has an idea. But there's not an absolute message. They both have a meaning in their heads in terms of the information that's going up. But it may not be the same. That's why there's no inherent meaning in any one message. It's what they both perceive. Here's an animal communicating. Perfect. This is what we needed. And there it goes. I have an interesting, I'm not sure that it's all gone. You bring a cute puppy in, and it's all, I should have brought a cute puppy to my defense and would have gone a lot faster. But how would you, I mean, this is all for behavioral signals. But most animal communication, a lot of animal communication is not about behavior. I mean, how would you consider the bright red sexual swelling of an olive baboon, say, something that grows? And arouses the male. And because it's associated with fertility and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, we can, you know, the male gets excited and they send that on the other and he copulates and blah, blah. And from the male's perspective, it may be that he has some idea about that in terms of where it's going, maybe it doesn't. But then certainly, there's nothing going on in the female's head, right? It's just a morphological grip. A combination. Right, right. And I said, if any of you do a combination of simply to understand that you have acquired into us some standard actions that are common just from my genetics, then there are these information that you have in ones that you have heard, which is valid and clear. And these are not subjects of all this. We don't know what's going on. It's like that. That's the point that it makes you lose. Right, but the precise information that the receiver would take from it will always depend on the receiver. On their ability to perceive it, their sensory systems, their experience, all these things are going to nuance how they're going to interpret the signal. Not much of that. Take the ability to do that in more ways and really impact the same thing when you get the signal. I think it can be, but I think a lot of animal communication is not like that. I am. You are the expert. I'm not the expert. I'm the expert. It's not important. Yes. I always thought that what did say which is language and other forms of communication, that the language has an underlying grammar. And I was just wondering, is it true that all human languages have an underlying grammar? And that if anyone sounds underlying grammar for any form of animal communication, and it's not as anybody even looking into that? Well, we talked a little bit about the animal communication stuff earlier with chimps and teaching them simple. Are there any grammar? Are there any grammar? Let's go to the human language stuff. A very interesting thing to read is this fellow Jimmy Button. I don't know if you've ever heard of him, but he was a whenever the Darwin put down on the beagle. They kidnapped Jimmy Button, the young boy about 10, and took him to England and taught him everything. He went to Cambridge, you name it. And they taught him all sorts of foreign languages and everything else. So one of the things that was very popular in the United States also in the 1600s was to kidnap an Indian and bring them to Europe and teach them all sorts of different languages. The most famous one was Samuel Occam, who apparently was a genius of all imaginable sizes. And he's the one that actually scared up the money for all the Ivy League colleges. Because they said, if you can do that with an Indian, what's next? So apparently any human being from anywhere in the world can learn any language anywhere with no trouble at all. The most complicated language, most linguists agree, is a language called Wahlperi, which is spoken at Ayers Rock in Australia. It has cases beyond anybody's imagination for what cases could be. Children learn it flawlessly with no effort whatsoever. Adults have one hell of a time. There are two people that I met in my life that can learn both deceased now. But they can learn any human language on exposure for about a year and be totally fluent. This ability usually disappears in most people, but it doesn't in all. So it seems to be the case that there's an inherent thing in people's heads that enables them to learn languages that are really honest to God spoken by other human beings. Now, when it comes down to animals, we were talking about this earlier, what kinds of symbol systems can they use? And can they use mathematics? And can they use symbols for different sorts of things? Just offhand, to my own feeling on this, is they don't tend to symbolize their activities. It's no particular reason why they should symbolize their activities. I think with all the things you're talking about, they do gestural sorts of things and interpret each other's gestures rather than noises. And human beings tend to be visual creatures that like sounds. And so I mean, I've seen movies of animals that watched people do things, and then they started doing them too, and maybe they learn that kind of a system. But there's something very unusual about the human being that it's a total symbol using creature. And in fact, we talk about the messages and the message content. In Shannon's thing, there's no message content at all. In fact, he has a sentence in there that gets many people mad. He says, I don't even care if there are messages. He just wants to know how many tell of, if you have your cell phone breaks, and you take it to the dealer, he's not going to say, what do you talk about? You don't care. And he's not going to say, what language do you use? He doesn't care. He's going to plug a bunch of gizmos in and get it back working. If your TV breaks, the guy's not going to say, what do you watch? John Wayne movies? It doesn't make any difference. He's going to put a bunch of signals through that thing that are going to be jagged lines, big round balls, crazy colors. And if it absorbs all of those weirdo things, then it works perfectly. And that's what most syntax and Chomsky type stuff is. It's finding those structures that define the boundaries, the outer boundaries of human language structures, independent of what the meanings might be. So are any little structures down the language from the outer line? Well, there's a huge, as you can see, there's huge amounts of debate about this stuff. So maybe the closest thing is the puttino's guenan. You say you're going to bring up a super dealer? Unfortunately. So the puttino's guenan has a system. I mean, we just start into it's body systems, right? But they have a system where they use one particular called a piao call for a leopard or ground-based predator, at least, and a hack call, which they use for aerial threats. So they're two different predator type responses. And then they combine those two calls in specific form when they want to travel. So they use some combination of between two and five piao calls, followed by some combination between two and five hack calls in a sequence. They go piao, piao, hack, hack, and then they all move out. So that's quite interesting-ish. But quite exactly what's going on in those kind of systems. I guess we have no idea. But the vocalizations themselves seem to be sort of at least some sort of functional referentiality in what they do. And then they're also combined in other contexts. I think we've made a mistake here today that we were confusing in my terminology language and speech. Well, that's a speech. Speech is what humans do. Bees have language. Other species have language. Can we define language? No, you said you couldn't do it. I couldn't do it, but you know. I think what the question there was about was speech. No, grammar. Is that grammar? Grammar. So bees don't have language. I don't know how would you define language? If I might interject. So now what you've done is you've invented definitions that exclude anything by humans. Exactly. So that's a useless concept. But I have an excellent evolutionary behavioral ecology definition of communication. But I don't have the definition of language. But people have talked about language as a set of agreed upon symbols that are used conventionally. And people like Hawkett and others have listed, based on human language, certain design features that we do, such as grammar, such as productivity, such as using symbolic forms, such as arbitrariness. I mean, they're like 18 things. Just as an example, just to say, how can we compare what other species do with what we call language? Do other species show any of the properties of human language not forcing it into a language game, but just say this is how we do it. So we do have metrics like that. And many animals do show many of those design features. Again, if we just throw out the word language, just throw out the word language and say, that's what we do. And other animals may use, and that's our kind of communication system. And it could be nonverbal or verbal. And then we've got other animal communication systems. And we can call that x, y, and z. It's not better or worse. They're just different. Certainly not high-level. That would be a little bit more of your blank thing. But would you distinguish the dialogue that we've been carrying on here, which is through the modality of speech and the almost universal awe sound that went out when the puppy came in? I would distinguish between those two. I would consider one a vocal communication, a vocal signal that is probably, to some degree, inherent or inherited. Arousal-based. Arousal-based and reflexive and inherited and therefore probably has an evolutionary tract, whereas the words that are coming out of my mouth have to be learned. So we have a mode of signals. And we have something that's not a mode of signaling. But it doesn't have to be speech. It doesn't have to be acoustic. It doesn't have to be. A mode of could be non-intentional. Blushing. You have an emotion. You blush. So there's this realm of all these signals. But I think we're still stuck with this idea that what we do is that we call language. No other animal can have it. It's Chris is saying we're a priorially saying that this is language is better and no other animal can really do it. Because we've already said what it is. We're letting them. And we do this with all sorts of things. It's quite a circular. Yeah. And I never put language on any sort of hierarchy to say it's better or worse. But just an ability to somehow distinguish it, which is why I continue to bring up the inhuman non-linguistic communication of crying and laughing and things like that, which are evolved traits that have a communicative function. And I would have no difficulty distinguishing those from spoken or written or sign language that is learned. And there's based on a shared understanding of these symbols. So since I don't find that difficult to distinguish between crying and laughing and the use of written or spoken language, I'm not sure why then we'd have such a hard time distinguishing human language from non-linguistic forms in other species. Please. I would like to make a comment on complexity of their communication systems. And I happen to know a guy who was saved by dolphins. So I'm never going to tell about this. So the friends they have a boat, sometimes they go to a particular island in front of the put boat there and swim to the smaller island where there is very good beach. And a lot of dolphins also nearby. Once he stayed by himself to long on this smaller island and suddenly where they changed. And he decided to go as fast as possible to the boat. But in the middle waves became bigger and wind became bigger and he got the panic attack. And he did not know where to go back to the small island to be saved to the boat because it was something in the middle. And suddenly he felt something above him, below him. And it was dolphins who created the whale. They didn't attach him. They created the whale. And very fast moved him to the boat. So this panic attack was like a message for them. And they know where to go. They understood where he wants to go. Although he already was in the doubt. So when they brought him to the boat, they just left. And that was it. And I don't know how and actually I could give anyone the contact information of this guy. So you could know he had by himself. So and this event telling us about that there is a very complex system of communication. It was a complex message for them, this panic attack. They understood what's going on, what they could do, and where this whatever creature it is should go and why. They did not help him as they probably help their own members of their own species. So one of the questions may be our languages that we can see, they're very complex. And they actually help us to develop very complex technology. That, for example, improve only one hour function to like iPhone. Maybe they much more primitive that would actually animals using in their communications. And actually one of my other friends saying that animals don't need to develop this simple and political religious because they don't need them. They just don't need it because their life is much more complex than ours. We're sitting here without anything around except only humans. And we're using these our languages that we're creating complex technology, which is destroying environment. And actually it's not very smart. So there's the question, what is more complex? And what is their living and we are sitting in a token? And I'm not saying that I'm like, I don't this distinction myself. I'm also choosing to live in city, northern, in ancient, whatever it could be said about this. But anyway, what's their system of communications and more complex? Well, I'd like to respond to that real quickly. Because historically there have been reports of dolphins saving people, even, again, back in Greek times, awry, airy and being rescued by the dolphin. And I get a lot of letters from people who say they've been rescued. One of the things we've seen in not just dolphins, but in other animals like elephants and certainly primates, where a child will fall into an enclosure at a zoo. And it was, I think, a gorilla that held this child till the keepers could get out. Franz Duval, who's a well-known primatologist, was just giving a talk this weekend about this. And it seems that whether it's communication, per se, it may not be communication, but there's some awareness on the part of the animal, perhaps, of the plight of that organism. And, well, you're gone. Well, let me get. Wild dogs just did to that kid in the zoo. That's a very different. But those are wild hunting dogs. Those are predators. These, OK, so that may be different. It may not be all animals are the same. But nevertheless, there are several animal species that show helping, caregiving behavior that's not hardwired. Our colleague Ken Norris has shown that with dolphins and whales, their behavior is flexible. If you, one could argue that a dolphin that's an air-breathing animal, it could have been selected for that they would hold up anything that's air-breathing at the surface, because that would save an organism that they're related to or another dolphin. So it's hardwired. But they don't do it. It's not hardwired. You can see them not holding up all flailing animals. I mean, we've all watched that. So there's some selection there. I don't know what that selection is, but you do hear about it. So I just want to argue that I think there is something that may not be based on communication, but on perception or the plight of another that we would call empathy. And I think there's a high degree of learning there, too, because I think the examples where non-humans step in and are somehow protective or indicate some sort of protection response to human infants tend to be very highly publicized. They also tend to be in zoos or with captive or trade animals. It's not with wild dolphins. That's not the case. There are many cases, and I have a whole collection of them, of wild dolphins. We don't know their whole history of their wild, but have done this kind of little Ilion Gonzales. Name is case. He was hanging on that inner tube, and he told a colleague of mine who was with him, and Diane Sawyer in an interview, that as he slid off the inner tube, dolphins pushed him, much like you were saying, back up into the inner tube. So of course, the skeptic in all of us says the kid's hallucinating. He's been out there, the whole thing. But the fisherman who came on the rescue boat saw the dolphins, and they left when he approached. Interesting. So let's not jump too fast. No, certainly not. My question is related to whether studying these orders in animals could help us to learn about their communication or language. I just remembered how some people were suggesting that it's helpful to understand schizophrenia as a disorder of language, for example, and how many things that we understand in the field of psychiatry or neurology, we reach there by seeing what doesn't work, actually, not what works. So my question is, how is this applied into the animal communication, and what are, is there limitations for this one? Thank you. I think there's loads of different ways. I mean, you mentioned kind of mental disorders, but there's also a lot of sensory disorders. So people are interested in sort of color blindness and mechanics and understanding sensory perception, according to the question. Yeah. Really? According to things like this, I think there's people that are interested in individuals with sensory defects and trying to understand communication from those perspectives. And that's quite interesting, particularly in vision, because the way our luminance and color vision works, which I'm not going to go into in great amount of detail. But basically, we have a sort of corruption of how light and dark we can detect things as a consequence of our evolution of trigromacy. So dichromats, dichromatic anthropoids, and darkromatic humans supposedly have better kind of depth perception and various other things. In the Second World War, the RAF used to have a colorblind man in every squadron, apocryphal, possibly. The, in terms of kind of, I mean, I think there's a lot of models of depression, negativity bias, things like that, where people are interested in understanding the animal communication. So they're looking at mice and rats, but also in non-human primates, rearing individuals that have had different types of upbringing than can get. You can see types of effects that we would classify as being depression. So you show depressed individuals are characterized by negativity biases, essentially. Like when you show them things that they should be happy about, they still think it's really, really bad regardless. And you can get similar effects. You get very, very similar effects in non-human animals, depending on their prior experience. And I think they're used to touch the Earth. So non-human primates of some of the new world monkeys, they look at stress and they monitor the vocal modifications. Right. And I know that's what sort of the one that's saying your mind's a good question. OK. Yes. I mean, in general, because some people were saying that, I think that animals can now ask to bring, for example, that this was a kind of baseball game, because they're like, they don't have our language. And it's bringing this sort of language. So crazy animals are not our parts of the effects. So I was just saying. I mean, they could step. I mean, they use it extensively as models of things like anxiety and depression and things certainly. And it's important, I think, for our own studies that we understand these things for our own communication, but also for kind of human medicine. Like, we often try and test in drugs on rats and mice and things that are actually not normal mice and rats, like depending on how they've been read, will rare it's completely different. So the same kind of the same medicine, right? Or if they're males or females? Because of time, I'm sorry, these three gentlemen are going to have to be our last question. We'll be more succinct. I've been treated many years ago myself being not involved much with animals. I found myself running a mental hospital in a rural area. And they provided a house for me to live in. Somebody gave me a pet. It was a bird. It was a cockatiel. And I had no real relationship to this bird. It flew around this big, gold place. And I sort of sat around, wondering what the hell I'm doing there. And there was this bird. One day it snowed. Now, apparently this bird had come from Brazil, or some jungle area where there was no snow. And I was a city kid and always fascinated the concept that snow was covering everything up. So I look out the window, and everything was covered in white. All the fields, all the campus, everything, trees and white. Just looking at this. And suddenly, right beside me perched on a little bookshelf, Irma, the bird, is also looking at this. I didn't know Irma was looking at this. So I looked at Irma. And Irma looked at me. And we both knew that we were seeing something very interesting that we had not seen before. And not only did we know that, we were seeing something that we had not seen before, but we suddenly knew that each of us was knowing that we knew each of us were knowing that. And we were shocked. And so was Irma. I bet she was. And so did she realize that I understood what she was seeing, and she understood what I was seeing, and that we both understood what either of us was seeing. She flew away in panic to the next floor of this place. I was living. Now, to me, a terribly emotional experience. I had never, never conceived that an animal would look at something the way I was looking at it and knew and know that I was looking at my whole view of animals changed in that momentary flesh. So I would ask this then, a comic about receivers and centers. Are there any experiments in which animals perceived something and communicate this to humans in such a way that there's a mutual understanding going on? And has this documented? Is any of this documented? How many of us have gone wrong? I hope you know what to get to for birds. I mean, it's too much time, I think. I mean, there's plenty of examples of humans and birds having a communication system. Again, what goes on in their head is unclear. So the really classic example is the honeygoid? You know, the honeygoid? It's the type of African bird that it finds honey. And when it finds honey, it flies to the village. And it does a little song that means I've found that people interpret it to mean it's found honey. The people from the village, they come out and the bird flies and it stops on a branch and it keeps doing the call and then people move towards it. And it leads them to the honey because the bird is not capable of getting the honey out of the beesness. It needs people to smoke the bees out. The people then smoke out the bees. They get all the honey out of the nest. They take most of the honey and then they leave a big comb. And then the bird comes straight down and eats all the comb. So it's an amazing kind of inter-specific communication. But what's actually going on in the bird's head is quite another matter. I mean, you can't know that, but I think it's worthy of exploration as always. Sure. Can I take one second time? Really, first story. I tell this in my book. It's called The Time Out. I was working with the dolphin in the south of France, part of my PhD thesis. And I was using a technique the trainers will often use. I was training her to stay in front of me and eat fish that had been frosted and thawed and cut into three pieces. And she was a fairly young dolphin. She didn't have much experience. Her name was Cersei. And she learned very quickly within a day to stay in front of me. But when she did so, I'd put the bucket up. And if she was there, I'd give her a fish. If she swam away, I gave her a time out, which meant walking away about 10 feet away from the pool and just standing vertical and breaking the social contact. So I was cutting the fish into heads, middles, and tails, because it was big macro. And she wasn't eating the whole macro. She ate the heads. She ate the middles. She was spitting out the tails. So I cut the tails so that they no longer had the fins. So now she's learned to stay by me using the time out as a correction mechanism. And I was standing at the tank after she had been doing this pretty long. And she wasn't leaving the pool, the position. And by accident, I threw her an uncut tail. And she went to the other side of the pool, looked up at me, spit out the tail, went to the other side of the pool, and took a vertical position. And I'm, you're laughing. This is, I was laughing too. And I thought she couldn't possibly have just given me a time out. Now, that's an anecdote. But as a scientist, I could never report that. So then I turned it into an experiment, which was the unplanned experiment as part of my doctoral thesis. I was doing visual discrimination and dolphins at all. So I waited. And now I'm feeding her the next day. I'm giving her all the properly cut fish. And she stays. And then the next day, on purpose, I gave her another uncut tail. And Bunch goes across the pool, does it again. So I think that's a beautiful example of how we synchronize our patterns of behavior. And perhaps there is more joint attention and mutual understanding in how other animals can do it. So that, I just thought I'd. That's it. Go ahead. Yeah. Was my understanding growing up when I read these texts about animal behavior, that intelligence was defined as your ability to learn. And if that takes whatever they learn from the experience, which is based on chance, their current, it's been actively used to solve problems. That was generally the accepted definition of intelligence. And also, relationship with communication and language, I think was that, I guess you'd say that language is a form of communication. Not all communication is language. But it's, yeah, a lot of cases where language is used to discourage communication. So we all know instances of that. And we say, we're also getting to it is that the ability of animals learning from each other is, I can think of the Japanese monkeys, Makako, from Scotty, that they would, it comes from when there was a, that's taking the sweet potato dipping in salt water and running from the dirt and also would make it a tasteier for them. And the other thing is, giving them hands full of rice to make sure it's sand and they figure it, wouldn't figure it out, that if you drop it in water, the rice will pull to the surface and sand will sink. And the other monkeys start to pick, and they've been able to communicate just to each other how to do that. And with, here's what the mechanism was, the muzzle there, which is just boiled down to the old phrase monkey, see monkey do. That's what we go for that? I think it probably is monkey, see monkey do. There's teaching as far as we know is not very commonly observed really. I mean, it depends on how you define it, but there's no real good proof of teaching as opposed to just kind of observational evidence and repetition and things like this. And actually, it's quite interesting, because when you... The definition between teaching and repetition. The individual undertaking the behavior is doing it specifically with the aim of the other individual learning how to do it. And there's... Rather than just doing it and other individuals can be... There's non-optimal repetition. So, for example, in the famous Gombe chimps with the kitty determinates, people will watch the adult female will sit there for hours and stick the stick in and pull the termites out. And the young ones will sit then watch very intently. And people, first sort of casually say, oh, well, they're teaching the mothers teaching the young ones because eventually the older one learns how to do it. And they go through a lot of trial and error and they do it very poorly. The distinguishing characteristics is that if there were actual teaching going on, the mother would be, or the adult female in that situation, would be doing it non-optimal. She wouldn't simply be optimizing her own ability to get the termites. She would be doing it slower. She would be changing her body position. She would be correcting the young one. So they're right. When she's finished. Thousands of examples in humans that we call teaching that go right with your second definition. So we call it teaching, but it's not teaching. If it's not intentional, if we're, I mean, I learned how to change a tire watching my dad before he actually took the time to teach you. So when I watch a wild killer whale parent go and grab a seal off the beach and then take it and put it in front of their offspring and give it to the offspring. And the offspring sort of plays with it. And the seal ones where the mother goes and gets it again and puts it back in front of the baby. And that she is, isn't she teaching? I just think one of our points is I can mention that we're not running cat family. But don't. Right. I was like, yeah. Well, sometimes the mother would disable it so he can escape and set the stage to learning so that the young figure out how to sell hadn't just tear it in the environment. Like, you know, they said to stage the work. It just like first, that we learn to fly and that parents, the parents just kind of set the stage out and get encouraged by them. And I think that's the big distinguishing characteristic because in both of, it gets nuanced. And I don't like all the terminology between teaching and learning and experiential opportunities. But the situations that you described and also with the cats is they didn't actually teach them to do the kill. They provided opportunities for them to practice the skills that were innate. So what do you call a woman teaching 10-year-olds in a school? You don't call it teaching? I call it a stereotype. Sorry. What are we talking about? So what you just described is a perfect description of what many humans do to other humans, and we call it teaching. But you just said it's not teaching. I'm not sure I follow you. OK. Just go through your definition. Go through that example again. You just describe teaching. Right? I think when it gets to some of these, it gets very close. And I think, again, there's a bit. And I think it should be done over glasses of whiskey. Since we're running out of time, I was just listening to me some interest in this whole animal saving human thing. And there's not really any need to go to zoos or even talk about saving humans, because there's endless examples of animals saving other animals of completely different species. There are lions that have saved, maybe Angelo, there are lions that have saved, and pour off the other lions to protect the kid that fell into the zoo. I mean, there's just countless examples. So there's no need to distinguish predator or predator or zoo or non-zoos. There's a lot of them. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you so much. Fantastic. Well, thank you for your attention. All right. Thank you. Thank you.