 I'm Ed Nursecien, Director of the Helix Center. Today's program is on autism. And the participants are Andrew Gerber, could you raise? Andrew Gerber, who's Medical Director and CEO of Austin Rake Center and Associate Clinical Professor at the Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry at Columbia University. The new sheen, Haji Kani, is Associate Professor of Radiology at Harvard University. And she does research at the Martino Center for Biomedical Imaging and directs the Neurolimbic Laboratory. Craig Neuschafur is sitting there. He's Professor of Epidemiology and Biostatistics at the Drexel School of Public Health. He's the founding director of the AJ Autism Institute at the Drexel University. Jeremy Vistra van der Wig, sitting here is the Mortimer D. Sackler, Mortimer D. Sackler, Associate Professor of Psychiatry at Columbia University. He's a child and adolescent psychiatrist who uses molecular and transitional neuroscience research tools and applies them to find new treatments for autism and other genetic disorders. Martha Welsh is Associate Professor of Psychiatry at the Department of Pediatrics and Pathology and Cell Biology at Columbia University. She's the Director of the Nurture Science Program in Pediatrics and Director of the Brain God Initiative in Developmental Neuroscience. Thank you. The form that he's who wants to start starts. Oh, cool. Hey Andrew. No. I was flattered to be invited because Dr. Versesian is a former supervisor of mine and I was trained in Cornell. And one of the things that I've always loved about this field, an autism seems to me an example of that, is how science, basic science and clinical science and the art of being a clinician all come together. So I think we're all some combination of those things here which makes it interesting not things all of all. So maybe I'll help out a bit in the beginning. When I was in residency training, we had, I think, one course, maybe it was two hours on autism. This is early 70s. And now autism is a very big subject. So maybe we could start by you telling me and telling everyone what happened. OK, I could start in the 70s. OK. Probably the only one here other than you. In the 70s, I began my training in child psychiatry. And we were studying ethology. Jane Goodall's chimps in Tinbergen. I learned from Goodall that high nurture mothers raised the most successful chimps. And I learned from Tinbergen that animals and conflicts showed equal portions of approach and avoidance behaviors when they were feeling threatened or in conflict of any kind. So I'm putting it when I entered an autism nursery. And by the way, I had never seen autistic children till medical school wasn't common way to do so. And so I went in there and I said, oh, why did they send me into this nursery to treat children when there's no treatment for this and is supposed to be a hopeless neurological disorder? But then I started thinking, I'm seeing approach avoidance behavior. High nurture could eliminate avoidance behavior and turn it into approach behavior. And I set out to test that. And that was accounted for about 25 years of my practice. I started a nonprofit for that and teamed up with Nico Tinbergen. In the meantime, got the Nobel Prize for his work. And I saw that I wasn't making any progress with my ideas because, indeed, high nurture did overcome avoidance behavior and autistic children and liberated them for normal development. So this was a big piece of information. Then I started treating orphans from the world's orphanages who also couldn't accept nurture and use it for development in a normal way. And I found out when the high nurture and dimension got both groups on a normal path of development and cured what they both had in common gut problems that, ah, peptides of nurture. So I left my dear practice, went to Columbia to investigate peptides of nurture. Of course, people thought I was nuts. What did the gut have to do with autism? Now we know it's a very big problem in autistic children. And they stopped laughing at me when I got a patent for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease. In the meantime, I was trying to study what exactly was happening. And we've been looking at the biological undependents of nurture as well as what's happening in actual patients. And we just completed a randomized control trial using my theory of autonomic co-conditioning. The difference between me and most of psychiatry is psychiatrists aimed at helping children, even babies, to self-regulate. That's the big goal. No. It's a misunderstanding of mammalian biology co-regulation at the autonomic level, get the mother and the baby to co-regulate a man that liberates the brain for normal development. And indeed, what I found in these autistic children then was normal development and not even normal superior. So at my nurture science program, we're moving up the age range. Now we've done two to four-year-olds, the same kinds of results. And interestingly, in our preemie group, there's a high risk of autism and premature infants. And just on the autism screen 18 months, we've reduced it from one out of four to one out of 10 testing positive. So it's very exciting. And other people are finding, yes, some of these children can be set on a normal path of development. So that's what's happened since 1970. And what do you think? No, that's very interesting. But you say, I'm coming from, I was trained in Switzerland and in the French-speaking Switzerland. So there we learn that autism is a psychiatric disease that is inflicted by bad mothers to the kids. And it's crazy that it is still like that today and that people are still, I mean, I had parents coming to, because at some point I was doing research both in Switzerland and here. And in Switzerland, I had parents coming to my office and telling me horror stories of, first of all, they would not diagnose their child because you don't want to label a child. And then when eventually they got a diagnosis and a dialogue, the question was, did you really desire this child? And then he was going on and on. And I think it's important that we today hear in this place, which is the Psychonality Institute, we state high and loud that bad mothering has nothing to do with autism and that it's neurodevelopment disorder that has to do with a brain that is not developing normally for many different reasons. No matter what the cause is, it doesn't mean that it can't be overcome. Absolutely. I totally agree with most of the identified causes, underlying cause of autism, are on stress pathways. And so an anti-stress modality has a good chance to intervene. But no, mother shouldn't be blamed at all. And in fact, she's powerful, powerful. And my insights about the gut in autism came from treating many, many children from Paris with autism. So I think I can't comment on the 70s. I guess I was alive then. I don't remember much of it. But I first started working in a lab, working with the child psychiatrist in 1994 or so. And at that point, we were still talking about autism as something in 10,000, which is quite different from the way we describe numbers. And that's changed quite a lot. I think there also is a fairly radical shift in terms of societal awareness and how much conversation happens around autism. I think that they're also even prior to the 90s has been a shift from thinking about this as a psychological disorder to thinking about this as a brain disorder, something that is happening. I think over the course of this discussion, we can talk about what that might mean or not mean. But from my perspective, that increase to a large extent is about learning to see something that we didn't see before. In some way, being in this place, it's like before Freud described the unconscious. That seemed like such a foreign concept. And once you hear it, like, oh, yeah, of course. And I think in a lot of ways, that's the experience now for clinicians, certainly, but I think for a broader society around autism, particularly milder kids with autism spectrum disorder, where they wouldn't have been seen before. So when I was in elementary school, we certainly had a child in my class who had what we would describe now as autism spectrum disorder. How was that treated? Essentially, she was picked on. And that was about it, at least from what I know. And that probably wouldn't happen today. Today, we would have a way to describe what she was dealing with. So I think that's most of the increase in terms of awareness, seeing something we didn't use to see. I think that there is also likely a real increase, but it's really hard to measure and to know whether that represents something beyond better screening, better awareness, different diagnostic tools, different diagnostic criteria. But there are risk factors that we know about that have certainly increased in society. And I think it's reasonable to expect that there is an increase we would measure if we use the same methods that we apply today back in 1970 or 1940, whatever. What was hard for you? So, yeah, I think we have other folks who can talk more about it. But there are robust ones. Go ahead. Well, in fact, if we talk a little bit more about the prevalence trend and the increase that we observe, I think that, you know, obviously what's root, what's driving the attention in society around autism is this awareness that it's much more common than we thought. So the question of why is a challenge. I'm an epidemiologist, so we study the distribution of disease and population. So I'm the guy who, in theory, is supposed to be able to figure this out. And it is for a number of reasons very challenging with respect to autism because of a lot of the factors that Jeremy alluded to. In the U.S. of my history, an autism goes back about 15 years, and it really extends back to the time when public health people and epidemiologists thought that it might make sense to pay attention to autism. It really wasn't on the radar screen of public health at all. Clinicians were aware of it. Of course, it was considered a very rare condition, not likely to have a major population health burden. But, you know, 15 years ago, it was obvious that more children were being diagnosed with autism. And in the United States, we had very little tools to measure the prevalence of autism in the population. So the CDC started conducting surveillance for autism in 2002, was the first year. And it's a complicated approach. It's far from perfect. But what it is, is it is measuring prevalence the same way in sequential two-year periods. And we've seen prevalence continue to increase. When we first started measuring that in 2002, prevalence was 1 in 1,10. In 2012, the prevalence is 1 in 68. So we've seen what's still been over 10 years and measured prevalence according to the CDC adapted. You know, still a fairly substantial increase. From 2010 to 2012, it's the first time we've seen a plateau. So what does that mean? Just because we measure the same way, you know, from 2002 to 2010, doesn't mean that that increase that we saw was real. Because there's still awareness factors going on in the community. And in fact, in the CDC system, there are some things that we can do to track that. We can look at different areas in the country where prevalence is higher and see things like the children who are counted in the surveillance system, many more developmental assessments than in areas where the prevalence is lower. So this idea that if you're looking harder, you know, you're going to see things more clearly is born out in some of this population data. So to Jeremy's point, the idea of trying to parse out what's driving this is very hard. And there have been empirical studies that you try to look at individual factors that you can measure. You can see if maybe if you're estimating prevalence at age 5, right, and nothing really is changing with real risk, but a certain proportion of children every year are getting detected at an earlier age, that can introduce what looks like an increase in prevalence at 5, even though real risk isn't changing. And people have looked at that and that's going on to some extent. Our colleagues in Scandinavia, where they have very well-developed registries, have been tracking autism prevalence, and they've been able to estimate things like the shift from DSM-3 to DSM-4, and how much of the prevalence increase that has accounted for. And that's accounted for some. Not all. When you look at these diagnostic-related factors and you try to quantify them, these things that we can measure easily, shifting age, shifting a diagnostic system, they account for a chunk. But we don't have a good way to measure just this general increased awareness and how much the fact that nursery school teachers and kindergarten teachers are more aware of this and are alerting parents and parents are more. We have no way of measuring that. So it still is an unanswered question and a very important one about whether or not how much of this increase is due to real risk. I sort of fall on the same catamasked bed as I, you know, to give an opinion. I think a majority of it is diagnostic-related, but I think some of it is due to changing risk factors. And we can... There is more asthma than there was before. Right. For sure. And that's not something that you would diagnose, you know, because you look for it more. Right. So I think there are things in the environment that are producing things that might increase risks for different things. I'm not saying that it's the same for autism, but there are things changing in the environment that is changing the health of kids. I wanted to pose to another piece of this, which I want to make sure we don't skip over, which is the question of what point does or is autism a unitary thing? Never. And because it's so easy to slip, because it's such a hard discussion to have, we slip into the discussion of autism or not. And I'll tell you with the perspective that I brought to this, you know, we are in the psychoanalytic institute, and I think it's unfortunate that probably the best-known heritage of the psychoanalytic field is this travesty of having autism thought of as a parent-induced disorder. But there's something, to me, much more valuable of the psychoanalytic perspective has always had to offer. And that is this notion that the way we construct our worlds, the way we symbolize, the way we name things, then affects the way we see them and interact with them. And so there's something about this story of autism where it meant one thing to Leo Canner, and it means something entirely different to us now, and how we got from one to the other, that, all right, it's largely different now. And it's not from one to the other. Using the same word is such a complex thing. I mean, I don't know how many times I've had colleagues outside of Chatsukhaitra or autism say to me, oh, I believe in autism. But this person you diagnosed with autism, that you shouldn't call that autism. And I don't know how many debates I was part of in various places. And people get into these arguments about this is or isn't autism. And when you strip out what they're arguing about, it's not actually about a different behavior. It's about some construct that they're coming up with that isn't, that is not designed in nature, at least to my view, as neatly in this category versus the other. Now, it's certainly not the only thing in Chatsukhaitra or in other fields like that, right? Why do we call hypertension over 160 systolic? Why do we call ADHD over some arbitrary score on a certain test? It's not because we don't think there are people with attentional difficulties or that it isn't risky to have higher blood pressure, but because we have continuous and then we make some kind of a line. We draw some line because it serves a function. And I worry that that's not, we don't talk about that enough. Or it's perceived, if you talk about it, it's perceived as you're somehow against the public health problem of autism. Whereas I don't think we all agree on it. I mean, the last thing I'll say on that for now is there's this great study that Kathy Lord, who Jeremy works with and I worked with at one point, published from the Simon Simplex collection, you know the study, I'm sure better than I do Jeremy, but where they looked at what predicts across, I think, was 14 sites, all very impressive places. Harvard Yale, you know, Vanderbilt, Michigan, Columbia, et cetera, what predicts who got called by expert clinicians autistic, this was in DSM four days, pervasive developmental disorder, Asperger's. And there was only one thing that predicted it to my recollection, which was site. In other words, there were cultures within the sites that used terms in certain ways, but it wasn't consensus. Now there's a lot of work to correct that, but we need to still talk about it. Yeah, that's why we don't have those categories anymore. Kathy's description, I don't know, it's her term originally, but it's carving meatloaf at the joints. So you don't have lines between things, and I think we would all acknowledge that it's really difficult to say for kids who are sort of on the bubble, whether they truly have autism spectrum disorder or they don't, and a lot of it was driving those cultural differences between sites was actually not something specific about those clinicians. It was the services available in their state, depending on diagnosis. And by the way, this is also what drives some of the differences between states for the CDC epidemiology, where it seems like it's this really clean thing, but it's quite dependent on school records and clinicians making judgments that determine whether a child gets no services in the school or gets sometimes quite exquisite services that are specifically for autism and wouldn't pertain if you said that the child has intellectual disability plus mixed receptive expressive language disorder plus ADHD, that wouldn't necessarily generate any services for that child, whereas autism and the child may have a lot of those features will get considerable help. And I think that's part of the challenge. The way I think about autism is it's a final common outcome, but that doesn't mean that the primary problem is a social deficit. Social interaction is just about the most complex thing that we do as humans, and so you can have sensory problems that lead in that direction. We know that children who have visual deficits or auditory deficits are at higher risk of autism spectrum disorder, what we don't know is it's because of the sensory deficit, but we also know that those deficits are really common, sensory difficulties are really common in kids with ASD. So what does that mean? It could be that it's coming separately from a common genetic risk. We have to be careful about that, but sensory is easy to talk about because we all relate to it. If you can't get the input, how are you going to interact with others? But I think that's the thing that is common across the spectrum. If you take children who have deep disabilities and very high functioning people, they all share this sensory hypersensitivity. And I think that's interesting. There's a range, right? Yeah, there is a range. But I think a lot of researchers now tend to agree that there is an imbalance between excited and inhibitory systems in autism, and I think that's where maybe things are happening. I mean, it's a brain that is not well balanced and there is too much noise in the brain, if one wants to say it. And that leads to difficulties in the most complex things we have, which is social interaction, but also other drugs. It's not just the brain, it's the body. Yeah. We have to get out of the brain. The brain is connected, especially to the viscera. And you will not have any effect really on hyperactivity or even on the ability to be remediated for auditory and visual processing deficits if you're not calm. And I think my work in the gut really tells us we better pay attention. And the octetosa receptors in the gut, we showed it for the first time. We showed what the signaling is in downstream pain, or the doctor. And this is one system, this derasionaltism we got to start looking at the whole body, and not just the brain. The brain is a motor organ as far as I'm concerned. And psychiatry only wants to look at the cortex. There's another piece of the brain here that psychiatry has missed entirely. And they're modified by autonomics. Jeremy, can I come, I wanted to come back to your point that we've made a step forward by collapsing pervasive developmental disorder asperger's and autism. And I do think that that's a step forward, although I think Fred Bookmark might disagree. But I don't think we're done because what I hear from colleagues, clinicians, family is the terms nonverbal learning disorder, sensory integration disorder, and soid personality in adults, and I don't think we know how those overlap or don't overlap with various aspects of what we mean by autism. So even the word autism now, I think is still uncertain, has uncertain boundaries. And if the more we use it as a singular noun, the more we fool ourselves, I worry into thinking that we've figured out where the edges of this meatloaf are. Yeah, I would agree with that, but correct. Well, so, yeah, I think my comments a little away from that, but related to distribution. Maybe you go first, Jeremy, and I'll jump back in. So I would acknowledge, we acknowledge we know where the edges are, and we also, in particular, don't know where the edges are likely to be for an individual longitudinally. And that's a real challenge right now because we have kids who, at two or three years old, clearly have what we define now, carefully as autism spectrum disorder, who by the time they're 10, don't look that way again, and sometimes then again by the time they're 20, look like they have schizoid personality disorder. So there are these sort of ebbs and floes in expectations and ways of interacting that predict whether a child is impaired by what presumably are static changes in the brain. And I think that's one of the challenges we have not just for autism spectrum disorder, but across all of medicine, but I would say particularly in behaviorally defined disorders where the expected behavior changes developmentally along with the individuals or sort of the organisms capacity to do different things, evolves over time. So, you know, 10 year olds oftentimes can interact quite nicely around restricted and can do, you know, beautiful parallel play where both kids are watching and doing the same thing, but by the time they're 15 they have to be facing each other having a nice social interaction and that may not be as simple. So I think that there's a lot of ebb and flow and there are a lot of questions around which difficulties should be defined within the autism spectrum and which shouldn't. Because one of the sequelae it seems to me to that is when we then start to have the discussions around treatment, which I agree or ultimately where we all want to go, it then becomes easy, they vague, a target for projection about what we think made the difference or not when we don't actually know the normal course of a lot of these illnesses. So I hear a lot of different stories from a lot of different people about what achieves some people call it cure or certainly improvement and without actually understanding the variability, it's very hard to track those things. I mean, I don't know, I want us to be working in a therapeutic way but I also want us to be able to agree on what we're measuring. So I do think the field very much wants to go in the direction of leaving the idea of dichotomy, autism versus no autism. I think that's the way some parts of the field wants to go. But I think the critical tension about the need for a diagnostic label to access services is going to be something that's just going to be pulling back on that. And I think that from a medical sociologic perspective, not that I'm qualified to have one, but from that perspective, I think the need to have categorical diagnoses sort of create these problems for us in other fields too outside of autism. But part of the two reasons why I think the field wants to go in this direction and there's some support for going this way. I wanted to just comment on briefly. It's one etiology. So there's been some very elegant work recently, although it's really just starting where it's done in large twin samples where autism diagnosis was measured, but they also did quantitative measurement of autism-related phenotypes using what are still arguably early days tools, autism quotients, SRS. These are mostly parent-report questionnaires that ask about a range of behaviors and generate sort of a continuous score instead of saying yes, autism, no. And what they did in these family studies is they estimated some basic characteristics of etiology, like what component of the condition was heritable, what component was due to shared environment, what component was due to unshared environment? There are lots of problems with doing that, but it's one way to sort of take a big picture look at etiology. And they did that based on the continuous measures, and they did that based on just categorizing the extreme end of the distribution what you would do when you're saying these are cases. And they basically found identical results, which in some ways I think is going to prove to be pretty important, because I think people were holding onto this idea that this thing that we think of as autism has its own, it's its own thing that he causes, and if we start thinking about this broader spectrum, we're somehow going to be diluting our ability to find a spot, because in fact, I think we're actually going to be increasing the power, because when we measure things dimensionally, it's very helpful in research and increases statistical power, it's very, very helpful. So that's point one. Point two is on, you talked about the public health perspective, and the idea that there's some sort of tension in terms of, you know, ignoring the diagnosis of autism is really ironic, because actually the public health perspective is really focused on dimensionality. It's actually this thing called the prevention paradox, it's termed invented by very famous British epidemiologists called Jeffrey Rose, and in fact your hypertension example works great for this. If you think about the distribution of blood pressures in the population, and you think about the people who are above a clinical cut point, and we consider them hypertensive. If you have two strategies to fight hypertension in the population, one was you treat everybody who's clinically hypertensive, and then you estimate, say, how many heart attacks would I prevent? And then if you said it, well what if I switched shift the whole blood pressure distribution to percentile points this way? You actually would prevent many more adverse events doing that than you would just treating the people at the extremes, because the folks, the left of the extremes, there's so many more of them, and that benefit of just shifting. So that's the prevention paradox, and that's not to say we shouldn't treat the people at the extremes, or spend some extra time and energy focused on them, of course we should. But we shouldn't lose sight of shifting these entire distributions. And I think in behavioral conditions it's a little harder to wrap our heads around that, but I mean I actually feel that bringing that kind of thinking to autism is very helpful. Like, you know, if we try to improve social cognition among all preschoolers, right, and there's going to be some benefits for kids who are at risk for autism, but there are going to be benefits for other kids too in terms of academic achievement, other psychopathology down the line. So I think that's the way we have, so that's why I think the field wants to go this way, but we have to get around this nettlesome problem of, you know, very real problem that families need a diagnosis to start getting stuff done for their kids. Yeah, I think actually my reading of that emerging literature is that the estimates of heritability are actually higher when you look at social communication as a quantitative trait, and repetitive behavior as a quantitative trait. Although some of that's also driven by the one Hall-Mayer study that sort of reports heritability as being considerably lower, but I think that's an interesting point. What we really don't understand is why we have so many kids who have elevated scores in both social communication and repetitive behavior domains, if these really are just quantitative traits that are independent in the population, and that's a challenge. The SRS doesn't do that because it lumps everything together. No, and it could be, it could be, you know, if we, and again, probably reducing this to saying that there's one dimension of phenotype for autism is a gross oversimplification, but let's just say there's one dimension. What could be is there's one dimension and then there's, you know, a tiny bimodal sort of peak out here, and some of that overlap is in that peak, but it may continue. So this is a sense, and it's very helpful. There's one other factor, though, which I think we'd be remiss to not acknowledge, and it's tied to the public health awareness issue, but it can sound nefarious, and therefore is worth stating clearly. There's also an academic thing that happens when an area becomes hot, when something becomes where funding goes, that academics, treaters, agencies want to join in because A, they get funding for it, and B, they are then seen as dealing with a contemporary problem, which is not to say it isn't an important problem or that they shouldn't do this or somehow this is some evil thing. I don't believe that, but it does create a kind of, you know, snowballing effect. I don't think I would have ended up working in the autism field if I hadn't been looking for funding around the time when this was a major funding priority, and so that word caught on. Now, there are people who got to it long before that and can say, I was there before it became a thing, but certainly the amount that we talk about it today and the amount that we, of money that's going into it, has some kind of a feedback loop with our own activities, and I'm curious what others think about it that way. I started in 2000, so I will... No, I think it's important that a lot of people are doing research on that, because there is so much that we don't know, and I think a lot of us are trying to find biomarker for autism, if there is such a thing, and because we need something that will help us measure treatment effects and what changes with treatment, and maybe also what's common across autism, and I think it's important that a lot of resources are put into research on autism, because it also informs you about other disorders, other neurodevelopmental disorders, because we talk about autism, but I think there is a big family of neurodevelopmental disorders such as ADHD, and Tourette syndrome, and all kind of things that kind of overlap more or less, and before the DSM-4-5, you couldn't have autism in ADHD, it was exclusionary, and she's kind of crazy when you think about it, because a lot of people with autism have ADHD, and a lot of people with ADHD have autistic traits, so we also need to think about brain-developmental disorder as a more general thing that I think we need research about, because it's the future of kids that... Can I just contrast the way you're talking with the way the last comment you made, because to me saying we need more resources for this thing called autism is not the same, as saying we need to understand what these multiple dimensions are that involve a wide range, including difficulties, and also including normal functioning, that presumably underlie it. It's much harder to sell that, and it's much easier to sell, there's this thing called autism. I think we need to be wider. Just focusing on autism. Autism is a strange concept to start. That's what I said. In interest of going wide, I was in Washington last week, and I found out that the statistic for kindergarten readiness is that 40% of kids are not ready for kindergarten, so we're going to have to go wider, Craig. I think that part of what's happening again is researchers are still using the term, but in their aims, mixed in, is sort of more work acknowledging the sort of breadth, and it'll be a slow transition. It's dangerous, and I agree with what you're saying about the perils of something becoming hot, but I do also think that there's a little bit of a backlash against autism, and it's tough to pit funding for one difficult condition against another, but the prevalence of autism and the prevalence of Alzheimer's are about the same. Alzheimer's is a terrible condition if it impacts on mortality in addition to quality of life, but the average age of onset of Alzheimer's, as we know, is 60 or so, autism is a lifelong condition. So research funding for Alzheimer's is about fourfold for autism right now, and that's again using these simplified labels and counting things. Autism, the most common neurodevelopmental condition that's serious, $250 billion a year cost estimation. So I worry a little bit when we start talking about autism funding, and is it autism hot, and aren't we that yes, but at the same token, I really don't know that the resources that are going in this direction are yet at an appropriate level. Well, I'm hoping research is going to go into prevention. If it's really true, if we replicate our fine, every use of risk on MCHET, and more than 14, 1 in 10, the clue of how important prevention could be. And not only did it go from one to one ten, but dividing MCHET to two categories, the primary motor and socio-emotional, the family-nusher intervention babies had zero problems in socio-emotional, which means they're going to not be on your cut-off, Craig, where you move it. So I hope that it's not just going to go into autism, which speaking of autism, yes, the biggest increase is calling it a spectrum. What used to be true autism from the 70s, that's dire and actively rare still. But at the time it was linked to schizophrenia. Yeah, the Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders was for a time, Journal of Autism in Childed Schizophrenia. Now I should remember this, but that definitely went back and forth, and certainly the term autism came out of the original description of schizophrenia by Broiler. So it isn't something that Leo Connor just came up with. It was a descriptive term that he pulled out of the existing literature to describe children who really did seem a part. I think that's useful to pay attention to, in part as we follow folks longitudinally and try to understand those kids who are on the edges of the spectrum and what their lives look like. I think one example is a syndrome that's variously known as Vealicardiofacial syndrome, or 22Q deletion syndrome, but these are kids who, if you follow them, some of them have intellectual disability, some of them don't. Some of them have features that would generate diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder, some of them don't. Many of them develop mood disorders in adolescence, many of them develop psychosis in late adolescence or late adulthood, and you find a different term applied depending on what age you're looking at. And yet at the same time, all of these individuals have the same underlying cause, right? And we look at them differently, apply a different name at different time points in development, but what they have is this deletion syndrome, not autism plus ADHD and maybe intellectual disability, and then in another time bipolar disorder, and then another time schizophrenia. I suspect that what we will continue to find is that where we are able to really define the biology, we find that it does not respect our diagnostic boundaries and especially does not respect them over time, but that it will help us those clear, biological risk factors, which you can sometimes think of as causes, but usually are not causes of autism. And that causes of an IQ decrement of 20 points compared to family members, some form of social disability, some degree of anxiety that's higher, some sensory difficulty, and that sometimes yields a diagnosis of this or that, but what we're really talking about is what's happening in the brain, glimpsed at different points in development, if that makes sense. And we now have the capacity to do something like that for about 20% of kids with autism spectrum disorder, not that you're able to identify causes, but that you can do a genetic test and say, without this thing that we have found in the genome, this child almost certainly would not have autism spectrum disorder. And where that's true, you can follow a group of kids who have something in common to understand not autism spectrum disorder, but what is happening in that child related to their biology instead of what's happening at this point in time related to their behavior. There is one more thing I wanted to say about diagnosis and prevention is if we look at female with autism, because female with autism get diagnosed much later than males with autism because their way of behaving is very different. And a lot of them are missed until they become teenager, because they can't flush, instead of being alone in their corner, they kind of stand in the center, which works pretty well until you are a teenager, and after that, everything falls apart. And these females are at so much higher risk of eating disorders, anxiety, depression, and suicide, that if we were able to diagnose them and follow them up closely, we would prevent a lot of these secondary psychiatric disorders. And I think that this is something that is totally understudied, and people should be more aware of also the female manifestation of autism. I agree, and another take on prevention, obviously there's important thinking about preventing downstream psychopathology, but also upstream. So, are there a modifiable or avoidable contributing causes to autism? And that gets to the question of cause, and Jeremy's point was very well. Just ask a question before in terms of what machines said, or the incidence number between goals and goals different or same? What hasn't been done? A huge, huge, huge, four to one ratio. It's a male dominant condition, and basically that's one thing that basically hasn't changed. A little bit as prevalence has gone up, there's been a little bit of a shrinking back of that prevalence ratio, but really not very much. And some folks do believe that we're still under-diagnosing in girls, we probably are, especially at the higher functioning end of the spectrum. But there's no doubt that male prevalence for autism and for developmental conditions is higher. And understanding the basic biology that's driving that, it's sort of an elephant in the room kind of question that a lot of times when we talk about eating a lot of autism, we just don't even get the mention. We just avoid talking about, we don't really know why there's this male predominance. It's not simple things, it's not excellent genes, it could be a little bit, but there's no single obvious answer. And that's still something that we need to spend a lot more time on. And then this issue of talk about a genetic cause, and I like Jeremy's definition, you know, a cause is something, if you remove it, you would not have the case. And what that illustrates, what that definition illustrates, this is important for, I think, folks to think about, when I think about causes, is the five causes is not 100%. It's actually boundless, because let's say the only way to cause autism was you had a gene, a susceptibility gene, and there were some type of environmental insult. That was the only, this is hypothetical, that was the only way you caused autism. Every kid who had autism had this gene and had this environmental insult. Well in that case, how much, using Jeremy's definition, how much of autism is genetic? Well if I take away the gene, gene therapy or something, magic, we avoid all autism, so autism is 100% genetic. But if we remove that environmental trigger, we'd also reduce autism to zero. So autism is at the same time 100% environmental. So when you have multi-factual causes, you can say that you have a genetic case of autism, and that's great for potentially treating the kid, if you can figure out how those genes relate to treatment or understanding what's going on. But there also might be other contributing causes in that case too. So that's important. And so I think the prenatal period and understanding potentially avoidable causes, there's a lot of reasons I think there's a little controversy around this, but I think there's a lot of reasons to focus on the prenatal period as a time when the brain is developing. Molecular biology is suggesting that some of the changes in gene expression that we see that sort of are definitional or pathonomonic of autism. Well that's a little tricky to get that certain, but some of those changes, you know, they develop mid-gestation. There's other indicators that the prenatal period is really important. And trying to think a little bit about whether or not they're a modifiable or avoidable causes in the prenatal period to prevent autism, but probably also would have lots of spillover benefits to these broader endpoints that we were thinking about. Yes, we looked at the central pathology in our subjects in this pre-me population. And first of all, they have more pathology, particularly trophoglass inclusions. And we found no difference in the numbers in the two groups, the treatment group and the control group. But in the standard care group, the number predicted brain activity a term, whereas family nurture overcame that. There was no association between the numbers of these inclusion bodies and outcome. So yes, early prevention, even of biological phenomena. And that's why I'm so adamant about this, that we have to be looking at nurture and what it can do to overcome the downstream outcomes of these genetic or congenital conditions. They're not damning. It seems to me the most likely model that brings all of these together is this very multi-factorial model where there are thousands, if not tens of thousands of small contributions to risk. And it's very hard when you have that number and the contributions are small to label those causes or not causes. That isn't to say there aren't more rare cases with that account that have much larger risk associated with them. But it seems the vast majority of cases will be explained by this accumulation of many, many risks. And then we as a field in technology will have to figure out which of those can we intervene on and which can we not. And the question then becomes both on the nurturing side, it seems to me, and on the genetic side, where can we intervene and where do we not know how to? I don't think we know the answer to that. In the study? Oh, yes. It is very well documented. Well Jeremy said 20%. That's based on molecular genetic studies. The old twin studies, the original twin studies, and these are very straightforward in terms of how they're set up. Essentially you're looking at monozygotic twins where one is affected and then you will do it with the second one to see if that child is also affected and die zygotic twins. So identical versus fraternal twins. In the case of monozygotic or identical twins, they share 100% of their DNA. There are some caveats there. In the case of case, I got twins from a genetic perspective, they're like any other sibling. And so that allows you to make an estimate of heritability. And that's what most of our estimates are based on. The lowest estimate is hovering around 50%. The highest estimate hovers around 90, 90 plus and a few of those studies. So heritability clearly matters. But as Craig said, that is within an environmental context. So as an example, if you think about susceptibility to skin cancer or melanoma, if we all live in caves, that may look quite a lot different than if we all live outside. And that's an extreme example. But I think we have to acknowledge this that when we're looking at twins, there are certain aspects that are really don't come into the model so easily and represent a societal environment, which obviously does change a little bit. My favorite example illustrates the same point you're making is if you imagined a world in which everybody smoked. In other words, there was just a cultural norm. Everybody smoked. Well, in that case, smoking a lung cancer, that kind of lung cancer would be 100% genetic. Right? So it's which we obviously think of quite the other way because it would appear to be 100% genetic. But sometimes it would be if that were the environment. Yeah, right. Right. If that couldn't be changed. And to your point about identifying these complex causes, which you know, what unfortunately seems to be the road that we're headed down with autism is this issue where strong, contributing causes, you know, causes that have higher relative risk or rare mutation. They're rare. So the population impact of the things that are that are strong that might generally in epidemiology, we say, if it doubles the risk, it's considered strong. So, and some rare mutations have effects that are probably much much higher than that. But there, you know, the prevalence is very small. So the number, you know, the population impact of that cause is small. Things that are common, the risk, the magnitude of the risk increase is going to be much more modest. So, and it really seemed, you know, so back to your lung cancer example, we, you know, got lucky in public health lung cancer that we found the common environmental cause, cigarette smoking, that had a sevenfold relative risk. I don't think that's lurking around the corner in this sense. I think we're going to be, it's going to be a little tougher to parse these things out. But in terms of genetics, I mean, to a little bit like the 22 Q11, if you think of the first neurologic in that was described, in one same family, you had one child with autism and deep intellectual divisibility, another one who had Asperger syndrome, and the third one was just fine. They all had the same mutation, but the profile was very different. So, so that also shows the limit of the whole genetic thing in autism because, because we don't know what makes, in one case, something, and in the other case, something different. Yeah, I would completely agree with that. And even these strong, and I actually don't say cause, but just, you know, just explain what you mean. In some ways, you have to say cause or risk factor that manifests in this way. But as we find more and more of these rare genetic risk factors that are really robust, what we tend to find is that sort of variability, but variability within a range. And so the, the change is in the range, not necessarily the diagnosis. So, as an example, there's a 16P deletion duplication syndrome, which is one of these paradoxes that you can have either a deletion or a duplication of the same genomic region. And in both cases, you end up with autism about 20 something percent of the time. That's kind of dramatic and tells us something about brain development that at this point, actually, we can only have a laser desert guesses at. But it's a clue. When you look at folks who are affected, what you see most dramatically is a change in IQ score compared to family members. That's the clearest thing. And then other things that are like Martha said, not the brain. So you, well, some of them are. So you look at change in body size, body weight. You also see change in head circumference, presumably brain size. These are things that are really robustly associated with these genetic changes, much more so than an autism diagnosis, which I think tells us we, we don't really know what we're doing when we apply these diagnoses. We do. We're describing behavioral difficulties. But that doesn't map on that closely to the biology. Probably the range of difficulties, maybe the pattern of difficulties, or the child who has sensory hypersensitivity versus there are kids who have sensory hyposes. So I'm working with a child like that right now who really doesn't seem to notice things that most of us would experience is quite painful. So you can have a kid who's very sensitive and a kid who's totally hypersensitive. And we apply the same diagnosis to both kids. Well, I think over time we'll be able to fit some of those patterns on to risk factors more clearly. Right now we're really at the infancy of that. Much of that is true of all of psychiatry now. You could say that. I think in other areas people are maybe less bothered by this. And yeah. Well, I have a theory about that particular question of our intolerance of uncertainty, but I also want to link it to another observation. I'll bet you if we walked out to 2nd Avenue and stopped 10 random people and asked them, what do you think you'd be most curious about when it comes to autism? 9 out of 10 would bring up vaccines. And of course it's not a topic we want to talk about because it feels like you end up in these kind of impossible debates where the data points one way, the vaccines are not responsible for autism. But yet there is a, whatever we want to call this, there's a public feeling in a large number that this must be related. And what I say is that it is very hard as a society for us to tolerate the uncertainty, particularly when it comes to social disturbances in our children. And one of the things that I've seen over and over again in the families and the parents in particular is who have autistic children is a feeling inside that if only I could crack open this shell, my real child, my normal child would be inside. And I think that is in fact because we are so wired to find our children that it is such a profoundly difficult thing to accept children who are different, that this fantasy is perpetuated. And that leads I think not just within the academic side but in all of society, struggling with what it means to not know the answer to these questions. Well, it's a perfect storm, it's not only that, but it's also on the vaccination side. There's a huge history going back to the first cow pops inoculations of widespread social skepticism about this kind of tricky idea of, we're going to take your baby and we're going to put some packaging in them and that's going to be a good thing. And it comes back generation after generation in one form or another and you take that with your point about concern over the well-being of kids development and you have a perfect storm. Yeah, I think it's one of the few times when you as a parent in the conflict pain in the child and it's hard not to see why families view this as something all sorts of awful things can be linked to to. And some ways, blame yourself for anything that doesn't go to like for your child and this is just a really easy one to link on to because you did choose to put them in pain. We all make this choice, right? And you oftentimes are holding them as they're experiencing that pain that you are inflicting upon them. So of course you are quick to latch on to somebody thinking about this as leading to long-term social emotional risk. But that's, I mean, when you see the amount of evidence showing that there's none. That to me is insane how just because you have a blonde, good looking woman that goes on TV and tells nonsense, suddenly everybody's buying that. And it's scary. It's really scary. We have an election on Tuesday with 50% of the country potentially voting for something similar. And I think everybody knows which directs and I will. You are studying the brain of children with autism. What have you found so far? Anything? I mean, what I've been seeing a lot in my research was I'm studying how emotion processing is going on in autism. And the perception of other people, emotions and feelings and social. And I've been finding a few different things. One of them was that they seem to have difficulties perceiving emotion expressed by the body. And on the other hand, I've been showing that when they perceive people in pain, they are not at all insensitive to that. They actually have exactly the same effective, empathic reaction as we do. There is no difference in brain activation in kids with young adults with autism and typical controls when they see people in pain. They share the pain and they just don't know how to deal with it. So that's one thing. However, I did another experiment with more or less the same group of people where they had, it was a joint attention type of experiment where they had to understand a fearful gaze indicating a potential danger in their environment. And that's they didn't get at all. So sometimes you have very similar brain activation. Sometimes you have very different brain activation. What I'm seeing now, I'm interested in looking at, they have a problem with looking in the eyes. We know that. And so I've been doing experiments where I kind of force them to look at in the eyes or I let them look the way they want. And very interestingly, when you force them to look in the eyes and you show them low level fear faces. So I've been morphing neutral to 100% fear faces. I'm showing them 40% fear. They actually have hyper activation in the whole system compared to control. So they are more sensitive to these fearful faces when they are forced to look at them. And I think that's very interesting because it could be why they look away. And because it's, again, this too much flow of information that makes them hypersensitive and that would make them look away. And what happens if as a child you don't look into people's eyes and face, you don't learn a whole lot of things. And your social brain doesn't develop normally because you have less input from this thing. So I think it's been very interesting lately to think about this all eye contact effect and what it means in terms of development. And I see when a baby is born, there is a very crude system that allows to perceive faces. That's why, after just a few minutes, a baby will orient themselves towards faces. And this root is quick and dirty, but it's the root that is then used by our system to perceive fearful stimuli in the environment. It's called the sub-cortical root. And what I see in people with autism, young adults, is that sub-cortical root that processes fear is constantly over-activated when there is an eye contact. And I think that's really interesting because what it could mean is that at the beginning of development, this root gets too connected. And that over time, at least the whole cascade of social interaction difficulties, but it could be something very basic in terms of hyper-connection of this very low-level roots that could, I'm not saying this is the explanation about it. But I think it could be a contributing factor to the sum of the problem that we see. That's very interesting because in our study, we looked at the amount babies looked away from the mother, and in the intervention group, they looked away half as much as standard care babies. Interesting. Shall we go and see what questions they are? One of the problems that I have here is that from what I know about what psychiatrists are saying about autism, they don't understand what it is. And they have this thing called autistic spectrum with unrelated disorders. For example, if somebody has a lung problem, they're coughing, short of breath, and he's got tuberculosis, and another one has lung cancer. They both have shortness of breath, but they're two entirely different phenomenon. Now, we agree with autism is that they are withdrawn, and not socially interacting. Well, is the cause something inside the brain? Or is it a speech language problem? Because I hear people telling me, I run to people, oh, my son has autism. He can't communicate. He's withdrawn. He's in a shell. Unfortunately, I have an autistic brother, Boulder, and he's not in a group home, and he is totally articulate. But the difference between him and you is that he lacks the normal human needs. Like right now, we're interacting with each other. We're curious about each other. And the autistic people aren't. They're in a different world. They're in a world of patterns. Like, for example, when he was a kid, he would run away from home to ride on the subways. That's a pattern. Like baseball, it's a pattern. Music is a pattern. Checkers is a pattern. But normal interactions is not a pattern. They just have ceremonies. After my mother died, my father's last years, we go to the group home where he lives out in Suffolk County every six weeks or so. And as soon as he got into the car, we'd take him out for dinner. He'd have to say, do you have enough money for dinner? Because for whatever reason, the first time we took him out, he said that. That's a pattern. Where he'd sit in the car, after the same place. Now, there are also neurological problems. If you looked at, for example, he was normally coordinated. Normal. Could throw a ball, catch a ball. But if you ever see his handwriting, it was like someone that had cerebral palsy. Jagged. Or even the way in which they would interact, it's like something falls. I mean, just to trust my acting. Supposing somebody has this experience, I was walking down the park. I saw a wallet. So I picked up the wallet, and I flagged down the cop. And I gave it to him. Didn't have any money in it. So I guess he lost the wallet. Now, when a autistic person telling you the same story, I was walking down the street. I saw a wallet. The wallet was on the floor. I picked up the wallet. I picked up the wallet, and I saw a cop. And I called the cop. Do you see the difference? It's like they're in a different world. It's like a whole something very abnormal. So I don't see how you can link that to a speech language disorder. It's a whole different concept. Now, I'm sure you're familiar with Temple Graden. She's really weird because I believe is autistic, but actually not that severe. So she can function. And I think the things that she has said about overloading emotions. And the stimulation. Like the way you might imagine. I can look at you. And we're having a conversation. But I'm also getting other stimuli. The temperature, the room. Extraneous sounds. Smells. The feel of my feet and the shoes. But I can ignore all that and concentrate on what you're saying. We all do that. And what Temple Graden said is they can't do that. Imagine being bombarded by all kinds of stimuli. Thank you. And you can't control. So therefore, instead of they had the abnormal controls by having the spony system of ceremonies and patterns. For example, they have no sense of humor. They have no capacity to emotionally bond with anybody. So the reason I'm saying this is just because I think that we're talking about autism and without even saying, well, what the hell autism is? We maybe should have started there. But I think I would agree with a lot of what you've said. But I would say some in front of almost everything. Some people with autism. Some people. Because there are many different experiences. I would say somebody is clumsy. And because they have bad vision. And another because they have a neurological disorder. No, that was clear. We're done because there are other questions. But that was clear. What I thought the first point you were making is that the manifest, whatever you see manifestly, doesn't mean it's causal. That's what I'm saying. So I just want to clarify. Thank you. Thank you. Hi. One word that I didn't hear, I was surprised I guess, is the social disconnection. And it just seems to me that autism as what schizophrenia should be considered disconnection syndrons, that the differences occur because of the point in time which this disconnection occurs in terms of the brain and as it's encoding experience. And as you've said, there's like 10,000 factors. So there would be all different reasons for disconnections to occur in the brain. And schizophrenia, one of the reasons might be white matted to degradation. But there are many, many other things that are associated. And it seems to me when you think of the brain as a hierarchical processor with a lot of modularity, that social issues would be the most challenging and that at the highest levels of spectrum spectrum sub-tism, there would be those social issues because of the much greater level of integration as necessary to meaningfully connect the medial prefrontal cortex with the rest of the brain. But in addition, when you talk about the Bellicardio syndrome, you might have a much more severe type of disconnection that occurs at a much earlier stage. And then you also don't know whether that's really just that one issue versus the other 10,000 things and that that might be creating the variability in terms of whether somebody progresses to encode their cortex and then lead to further disintegration, which would be more of a schizophrenic like pattern versus somebody who disintegration is so early in development that you do not have really meaningful encoding and you have a much more significant disability. So I'm just wondering about this being really part of a disconnection syndrome and that it wouldn't be more helpful to be calling it that rather than autism. It's almost like the problem of me going to Alaska and speaking to Eskos and that's going to be having 26 words for snow, yet psychiatrists and neuroscientists really should have more than 26 words for this phenomena. You did hear me say that I thought one of the remedies would overcome many of these problems in autism would be to emotionally connect to recondition, co-condition and connect. So that's a lot of the things that I'm trying to imply that I agree with you. So if you see someone disconnected, the idea is get them reconnected. Yes. You're talking about patients that have much less severe disconnection disorder than many other autism disorders. I think that's not true. The my experience is not true. Hi. So I think what he was referring to the whole disconnection is like spot on because like yesterday I attended something on yoga and psyche and then Dr. Dan Siegel who's a neuropsychiatrist was talking about interpersonal neurobiology and just the mirroring neurons and all these things. So my question is I don't know if the panelists have come across a study where there was a population or sample groups that they had perfect bloods like as parents, perfect ratios, called hormonal ratios and things just everything seemed very good. And the absence of genetics and say even heavy metals or things that's getting more detailed. But parents that really didn't have much of a chance given all the labels and environmental, you know where I'm going with this. So any studies or findings or research that was done on that end? Any of your knowledge? I'm not sure what you mean. But maybe you know what it means. I don't know what it means. Not much of a chance. You mean that there's no genetic finding anything? I've heard many, many doctors talk about autism and there are different linkages, fire retardants, vaccines and different things. Whether there's much science to back it up or a little science to back it up, there are a lot of different linkages. So if you get people from a village who you sample their blood and everything looks good and they don't have much of the exposures that we have here in the Western Hemisphere, were there any, was that ever conducted I guess as well as? Yes, thank you for clarifying. So I don't know that we've done enough of that. And one of the problems is that most of the research on risk factors, etiology has been done in developed countries as you've alluded to. And at a very general level, the background rates of exposure, social exposures, environmental exposures are somewhat similar. The reason why there's been less of it and more pristine, typically lesser developed countries is because the apparatus to do the outcome assessment isn't there. So that's why we see a little dearth of it. However, there have been some investigations in more remote populations. And these are generally small scale. So it's difficult to compare rates as the prevalence rate of autism in such a population similar to Western society, but you do see autism there. You see autism basically everywhere. But we haven't done large scale studies in what would be lesser developed, very low exposure to the types of environmental concerns that you're raising at a size where we can estimate with some confidence what the autism prevalence is and to see if there's a shift down or a shift up so that we really have an idea. So there are general causes, but as far as historically there are general causes. But is there any kind of leading indicators of why the ratio has kind of been shrinking so quickly over the last two decades? Which ratio? The ratio of autistic children being born. I think the prevalence is going to be more and more and more. Yeah, just turning back to the original concept, I think a lot of it is diagnostic awareness. So I'll just give you a more concrete example. And I talked a little bit about this. I don't think I associated the numbers. In the Danish registries where they tracked over a 10 year period prevalence, it actually was longer than that. It was a longer time series, probably 10 years of birth cohorts with maybe 20 years of follow up because they could do those kinds of things. Many fold increase in prevalence over calendar times as we see everywhere. They looked at just two definable diagnostic related features. One was the shift from DSM-3 to DSM-4. And the other was the inclusion of psychiatric diagnoses in outpatient records, as opposed to just being inpatient psychiatric hospital records. Those two factors alone, nothing else accounted for 60% of the increase. Really? Yeah, now it's a big increase and there's still that 40%. But once you factor in the sort of softer factors related to awareness, you know, you're probably going to be eating into that. So, you know, that's why I think folks, and I don't know what others germiners are. Many people believe that a large chunk of this, above 50%, you know, how far above is 75, 80, 90%. It gets harder to know, but a large chunk of this is due to this constellation of diagnostic shifts and diagnostic awareness. But I believe that there is a small chunk that is probably due to some changing, you know, real risk factors in the environment. Do we know the numbers for maternal age increasing? Yeah. How much that's responsible for? Yeah, so they haven't said it's looked at that and I think California did that and they found perhaps, I think, I want to say, perhaps a 10% contract. But it's the same. What's that? I think it's maternal to the pet. It's maternal to the pet. It's maternal to the paternal age. They've looked at the increasing increase of preterm birth. And the other thing you have to remember too is you have that same problem that we talked about, we talked about causes. A lot of these things could overwrite when things overlap. It's not, you're like, oh, you said 10%, you said 60%, paternal age 10%, you're getting very close to 100%. But you can't do it like that. You have to look at everything together and account for the overlapping contributors and no study has been able to do anything like that. Thank you. Yeah, thanks. I want to thank the panel for some very interesting hypotheses and some interesting facts. Now, as I sort of set my question, which is about how far we've come and where we're going. I graduated from medical school down the street here 67 years ago and there's been a lot of progress. I'm a gastroenterologist. And let me explain to you what I mean. Pectic ulcer disease, two-dee-nolcer disease was more prevalent in the spring and in the fall and it's related in some ways to stress. And then H. pylori, which was there all along, we saw it. We just thought they were bacteria. Well, they are bacteria. And it took a long time to convince the community that it plays a major role in causing a due to ulcer. So one has to be patient between the time that somebody first has light gone and the time that the community begins to accept it. Now, one of the questions that I want to ask you is where are we going? For instance, there's an opportunity. Right now, there's a tension on the viral causes of brain development. Zika has sort of lit the fire. But there are a couple of others, toxoplasmosis is a factor. German measles is a factor that we've known for a long time. CMV is a factor. So I think there's an opportunity, these countries that were particularly hard hit, just having a small head is only, I think, part of, is just the tip of the iceberg. I think these babies are probably affected in other ways that may not really show up for three or five years. Can we mount some studies in these communities and even in Florida with these affected children? And with, you know, it's very nice to do studies in zebrafish and in mice and you can slice their brains. But with humans, you have to have more subtle ways of studying them. Where do you think we're going? I think that's a great point that there could be an opportunity with all the attention that's going to come and following highs. You can expose populations. You know, we think about a certain very narrow range of endpoints, but if we're going to go in there and we're going to put these kids under follow-up, there might be a great opportunity to look for a broader range of neurodevelopmental endpoints. We might learn some things, so I think that's a great suggestion. With respect to infectious causes of autism, that is an area where there has been an evidence-based growing. And there is, you know, it's one of those things. There have been a number of studies that have shown that prenatal infection, mostly earlier, in the pregnancy period, although there have been some studies with positive findings later on, has been linked to higher autism risk. The types of data, you know, these have not been studies where there's been biomarkers of prenatal infection. Largely, it's registry data, it's reports of infection on either outpatient or inpatient records. But that is an area where there is real and real interest. Toxo specifically has been looked at a little bit, and the findings there have not been as impressive. But influenza in particular, prenatal influenza, is one particular agent that has shown a positive in a number of studies and folks who have fallen. The most solid one is probably rubella, although we don't see it anymore. I mean, vaccines prevent autism. And that's just the clear example, that rubella exposure during a particular window, although thankfully we don't see it enough now that we can study it with today's methodology. But that seems clearly linked with not just autism, but a whole array of problems, including sensory problems as well as brain developmental problems more generally. So, you know, I think that it is clear that some of these infectious infections in utero are, in some cases, devastating. And in other cases, less clearly linked. The influenza data is a good example. So there's lots of influenza data, but it's all a little different. And so it's hard to pull apart. I have a different answer to your question, though, about where we're going, not around the issue of Zika or infectious causes, but this is something that makes me hopeful for the field and we alluded to it, which is, I think there is going to be a sea change from sharp marrow categories into an expansion all over psychiatry in understanding things along continuum. And, you know, the NIH has played a role in this by advancing this thing called the research domain criteria for ARDOC. And it's had a lot of pushback. It's certainly not been rolled out in the easiest way. And there's a lot of concerns about it. But I do think that general moving away from what was classically thought of as the DSM system that neatly divides people into groups and seeing many continue on. And I don't think we know what all those continue on are yet. I think the current version of ARDOC is just the first staff at that, but it may look quite different in 10 or 20 years. That that's going to give us the power, the statistical power that you alluded to earlier, to study things in a much broader way and then look at the interactions between these different dimensions. But now, I don't know when that'll be clinically useful. It could be a while, but I think that's a good step. I just want to comment on the first gentleman's concern, though, because he was worried about that. And at the risk of doing a really poor analogy, over expansion of the borders is important as well. And so, you know, I think we need to move from the meatball to the meatloaf, but we don't want to include the carrots and the onions and the pan, if you know what I'm saying. So there is concern about that. I think in your comments, you were worried that there's some dilution of what we think autism is and that that's going to have asthma. And that that's going to have adverse effects in our understanding. I think that is a legitimate concern, but I think as we move towards our doc and other ideas to think about dimensionality, we need to be mindful that I think people are being, even if that didn't come out in some of our earlier comments. So, I, sorry, I tend to be more of a splitter than a lumper when it comes down to it. I think it's important when we're applying diagnoses that are used clinically and informed treatment to be honest about what we can say and not say. And I think in that case, it makes sense to say, look, we're somewhere in the meatloaf. But I think when it comes to science, it's much more helpful to not say, well, this child has autism spectrum disorder, but to say that this child has this particular risk factor that contributes. So it may be that that's a way to get at people who are better defined. And from my perspective, the best definitions are ideologically relevant. So the genetic syndromes, the biomarkers, studying kids who are born extremely preterm, very low birth weight, following them up, most of those kids are not going to develop autism spectrum disorder. But if you can shift their developmental outcomes as a group, that's incredibly powerful. It makes me a little uncomfortable, honestly, to say that we're preventing autism that way. But we may well be improving developmental outcomes for a big group of kids in a really powerful way. And I would say that approach where we're studying, say, kids with a defined genetic risk factor that we can put our hands on and understanding what changes their outcomes, understanding how that comes about. I think that that's the revolution. We're in the midst of. And some people call it precision medicine. I think ultimately it's about just like hypertension. You want to know why? And once you've figured out, oh, this person has hypertension because they have a problem in their kidney, and you define what exactly the problem is and how you treat that particular case, and then expand outward to say, well, how many other folks can we find, have a related problem that might yield to the same treatments? And I think that's ultimately where we go. And it's initially about splitting, not lumping, although clinically splitting, meaning smaller groups that have better definition instead of larger groups that are really nebulous. Where you can get every diet and exercise and shift it that way with the right about what it is. I think there's a quality of discussion issue that to me, I think that splitting, lumping isn't the ideal analogy. It goes in the direction of dimensionality. Because in cardiology, there's no question that you have to decide to give the anti-hypertensive or not. I don't think anybody would ever argue that there's something bad about saying hypertension that I'm going to treat or not going to treat. But nobody is under the illusion that there is some kind of a bimodal distribution of blood pressure. And I think we are under, continue to be in our debates under this false impression sometimes that if we only can get the answer of what is autism and what isn't. And I know, and you don't know, and I'm going to tell you what it is. I think that's, I don't think that's good for our discussion. We're all really separate. By the way, the blood pressure analogy is interesting because a few years ago, what was the limit? 160 and now it's 130? Right. Sometimes you have to change depending on what you know. Okay. Do a chanchine neuropsychologist. I just wanted to address the question about the heterogeneity in autism. Based on some new work that's coming out of Mount Sinai, they're Sea River Center, they're looking at genetics, they have international, hugely international pooling the genes. And what they basically find is there are certain genes that are rare. And the rare ones that underlie autism, underlie specific subtypes. But then there are other genes that they call common variants that we all have. But we have very few of them, so we don't manifest the autistic spectrum. But those people who have a lot of them wind up showing signs of autism too. So it's a very diverse group with completely different genes. So then you say, well, how do you wind up with autism, with all of those different genotypes, to them looking at the construction of the synapse? And they're saying that many of these genes contribute in some way to putting together a synapse, and it really doesn't matter which way, like if your chair is wobbly, it doesn't really matter if the person is in the room. It doesn't really matter if the front leg or the back leg or the back is thrown off or something like that. You still have a wobbly, probably chair, it's how you get there. But you get there in different ways because it's different components of constructing these synapses. And then the question you could ask is, well, maybe they're different synapses. Maybe some are synapses related to emotion. Maybe those are the ones that are affected because they haven't yet determined that. So the work they're doing now is to give growth factors, neural growth factors, and in very young children to see if that has anything to do with maybe correcting some of the deficit or promoting learning, because if the synapses prevent adequate communication between the nerves, maybe you could do something to us. So they're looking at that. They're also looking at oxytocin thinking maybe you can promote normal emotional interaction with, you know, just by adding something extra to the situation. And then the third approach that this is not amounts on, but is the ABA therapy, you know, where some people are brought out. I still with that therapy, not everybody talks. And, you know, so then you say, okay, well, maybe their genotype affected that pathway. It's a world different. Thank you. Last question. Thank you for a great discussion. So my question about gender differences and autistic phenotype, because we know that it's one to four prevalence, but in genetics, back then we'll see that it's normal distribution of language and social skills between the relatives of autistic programs. So how, what's happening, why they're not diagnosed until the lesson year's goals? And is it any, maybe, societal pressure or any language skills which allow goals to overcome this deficit from childhood? Because we know that pragmatic language never better develop in females. I think the girls who have intellectual disabilities, those are diagnosed early. The one that are diagnosed late are those who have normal intelligence. And why is because their behavior is very different from the males, because girls are in general better at social interactions than boys. So maybe it's, and they're at this age. No? No, these are me and Populate. But what's interesting in the previous studies, in the extremely low birth weight with the premise where they were following these kids from the very beginning and doing all these tests, they don't find this one to one difference. So I think, again, we don't really know. Yeah, so I think that that's important. The girls who have intellectual disability plus autism, actually the lower the IQ, measured IQ goes, the smaller that ratio. So it's one to one if you get down into the range of IQ that most people would describe as almost unmeasurable. And then as you go up in some of the studies, it's as high as 10 to one in very gifted children. Why that is, so some people think it's based on societal expectations, sexism. I think that these are relevant expectations. But I think it also is meaningful that if you look at social aptitude measured any number of pace at an average level between men and women, women are more socially in tune on average. You take an individual, man, an individual woman, that isn't always true. But I think that this is something that probably does, in part, flavor the ratio that we see. And there's some evidence for why. So the expiratory I have been built on males. Does your child align little cars? Well, yeah, if he has cars to play with. I mean, there is a lot of things that were developed for boys that will not necessarily happen with girls. Thank you. Thank you.