 Recording in progress Good afternoon. On behalf of Ed Narsassian, Director of Helix, Helix Center. I welcome you to the first of our season. The second zoom year in our COVID period. We have gone ahead this year and scheduled some marvelous programs that I just want to mention to you so you can mark them down. In February, February 26th, we'll be having one on kinetic economics, which will discuss how we are affected in an international global trade world that when goods can't move. March 12th, we'll have a program on psychedelics April 30th on metaphysics in May 4th on flourishing versus languishing. So just consider us on those dates. And today we're very happy to have you join us for Design of G's as in G-E-N-E-S. And we have a wonderful group who are going to be with us today. And let me introduce a few of you who are having a little bit of problem with the zoom, but some you may hear phoning in and some are present here. Henry Greeley is the Edelman Johnson Professor of Law at the Genetics Center for Law and Bio Sciences at Stanford. He specializes in ethical, legal, and social issues arising from the bio sciences. And you can read online all of his incredible distinguished accomplishments. Robert Kutzman, we are hoping we'll be able to join us. He's Professor of Psychiatry at the College of Physicians and Surgeons and the Joseph Mailman School of Public Health. And the Director of the Online and In-Person Bioethics Masters in Certificate Program at Columbia University. Bartlett Riblekski is a full professor at the Bioethics Program at the School of Public Health University of Montreal and senior lecture on Global Health and Social Medicine at Harvard Medical School. Her research covers a variety of topics such as public funding or the interview IVF, the use of surplus frozen embryos, posthumous reproduction, pre-implantation genetic diagnosis, and many other related focuses. And Daniel Comfort is here as Professor of History of Medicine at Johns Hopkins. His interest lies in the history of genetics, eugenics, genomics, and biomedicine, as well as bioethics. And you can read of his other accomplishments and publications on the website. So I welcome you all. We've had a little bit of zoom entanglement. And so we hope the difficulties are over and from here on and it will be very compelling. So Jerry Horowitz, who is the Co-Director of the Helix Center, will now moderate. Thank you, Jerry. And Jerry from Columbia University, Professor of Psychiatry. Thank you, Beverly. This is very exciting. Made even more exciting by the late appearance of two of our esteemed panelists. This is great. Thank, thank you to Miguel and to Alex for getting this all done just at the last moment. Anyway, I'm eager to let the panelists begin their conversation. On today's topic, I want to point out that questions can be submitted on zoom and also through YouTube that will be collected by our administrator Alex. And he will read them out or read out a selection of them at the end of our conversation. And so just bear in mind that they will be collated and referred to later. And so, you know, further ado, Hank, Greeley in advance, agreed to sort of start things off and give us a sort of an overview of this topic. And then we'll see how the conversation proceeds from there. Hank. Okay, well, thank you. Happy to be here, wherever here is in cyberspace. Well, it was almost exactly three years ago, three years and a week ago when I was shocked one Sunday evening by an email from a friend, the title of which was Christopher babies. He was reporting on the then leaked report that a Chinese Chinese scientist named who John Kue, or something close to that. And he did announce the birth of twin girls, whose embryos had been edited using process called CRISPR, clustered regularly in a space short palindromic repeats which is a real good reason to use the acronym and just call it CRISPR, and had been born that year. And this caused a huge uproar. Ultimately, I think, Dr. who expected to be hailed as a hero, ended up getting denounced as a villain and ultimately sentenced to three years in prison in China. But that's the, that's the most recent of many interesting things that have gone on with human reproduction at the intersection of human reproduction and genetics. We can go back 50 years or so to when we started doing prenatal genetic testing through a process called amniot synthesis. After the birth of Louise Roberts, the first IVF baby. We started having more possibilities, and we can go back 30 years to the birth of the first child, who was born after a procedure called preamplantation genetic diagnosis, where embryos created through IVF so outside the women's body are genetically tested. That child is 31 years old I had the good fortune of talking to the reproductive endocrinologist who is involved in her birth and he's so proud of the fact that she's now a scientist. I keep telling him it didn't have anything to do with him or his genes and he just smiles. And now things have gotten more complicated we have embryo selection through PGD we have fetal selection through prenatal diagnosis we have embryo selection through preamplantation genetic diagnosis, which I'm just going to call PGD. And starting three years ago we have embryo editing through Christopher editing of embryos with at least three cases Dr Hood did at least, Dr who's work led to the birth of at least three babies before he was stopped and ultimately imprisoned. These options are continuing they're growing their new possibilities like mitochondrial replacement therapy, and their new possibilities coming from the genetics world, including some new efforts to try to figure out more meaning from James, particularly a process that is quite controversial called probabilistic risk scores. So all of these are going on the one thing that I think is clear is that at least in places and for people with access to good health care, modern health care and money to pay for it. A genetics is playing an increasing role in how we're having our babies. So I think between prenatal diagnosis preamplantation genetic diagnosis and embryo editing. Those are the three main steps that we need to think about in conjunction with how much or how little we know about what the DNA sequences actually mean. And I'll stop there. Excellent. Thank you. Hank, I think you raised so many interesting and I would dare say these are all touching on our sort of ethical sense, each one of them. I wonder if we could. And I also just, I just want to add very quickly, I'm always, I want to try to keep you honest in this sense I've always, a load the expression you know these are complex moral issues because I find that sort of as a hand waving gesture. I'd like to get down more into nitty gritty of how they are morally complex. So I invite any of the rest of the panelists to start in with any one of these topics and let's see how far we can go with it. So, first of all, thank you again to the organizers for planning this and it's great to see my colleagues and have a chance to interact with them this afternoon on this very important topic so I'm honored to be here and thank you again. And Hank, thank you for laying out some of the background and the issues. I think there's a few things I should say one is just as a little bit of background. So we don't demonize the technology entirely. The ability to edit jeans I should say does offer potential benefits for living people in other words that we, there are now clinical trials being done of gene therapies, and my scientists friends who work on this are emphasized that we don't want to shut down all research using this CRISPR technology that Hank so eloquently presented, but it's important that that is in other words, for instance, for Alzheimer's disease for people who are already born who have Alzheimer's, they have the genes that they're going to have. There are the potentials to use CRISPR, these so called sort of genetic scissors to cut out bad genes, for instance, and so there's a potential to use this for disease that could benefit large numbers of people, also for improving food, improving crops, livestock, making food that's resistant to pests, for instance, so just as a background. I think it's important to mention that the area I think where we're all concerned of course is using these technologies to alter future human beings that is to take when sperm meets egg and forms an embryo and eventually would form two cells and four than eight and eventually become one of us. When it's still at the one embryo stage we can go in as Hank was saying and alter the genes, and this is what Dr. who did, and I think is Hank and my fellow panelists know the problem is it's not quite ready for prime time in addition to all the other ethical problems so and answer your question there was a lot of risks involved basically is number one so Dr who apparently took out more DNA than he wanted to. And so there are so called off target effects I may want to just take out this much DNA and end up taking that much also genes probably have multiple functions in the body. So one gene he actually wanted to disable the so called CCR five gene that would allow HIV to get into cells. And so if you disable that gene but by disabling that gene, the child has a higher risk of having other viruses, influenza virus West now virus getting into cells. And in addition, he took out too much and jeans may that one gene may do other things as well that we're not even aware of yet so there's a lot of risks involved. And a problem is that we may we now live in a globalized world. And so even though there have been attempts in the US and in Western Europe to come up with guidelines by the National Academy of Sciences and the Royal Academy of Science and the Human Society Association in Great Britain. It's not clear what kind of enforcement ability, if any, or what kind of power such guidelines put out by such international organizations will have clearly we need to try to have such guidelines but the UN of course doesn't do that is very important doesn't manage to prevent all the war is it go on and so the possibility of a rogue scientists like Dr. her in filling the blank of whatever country outside Western Europe you want to think of Russia. So, as North Korea might go ahead and use this so there are questions about international oversight and ability to sort of control what's going on and then lastly I'll just make the point that as Hank really mentioned with pre implantation genetic diagnosis. We in the US have a basically unregulated assisted reproductive technology industry it's a multi billion dollar industry that allows many people to have children who are in fertile, but these technologies are being used to, for instance, give people just a boy child if they want to boy child, or we're now being able to prevent the breast cancer mutation other mutations that we know about from being transmitted to future generations. But this is a technology that wealthy people can use but not poor people sir questions of justice that were beginning and we'll begin to see diseases like breast cancer increasingly become diseases of the core because wealthy people as we go into the future will be able to prevent such diseases from being transmitted that those genes so just to highlight some of the sort of ethical complexities involved sort of drilling down a little bit. So I think it's great to have this discussion because I think awareness public awareness of these issues is really crucial. Bardete you had something to say. Yeah, because the points I wanted to make a follow beautifully from exactly the points Robert just made, which are that regardless of which technology we're using regardless of whether we're editing embryos in vitro or selecting embryos in vitro or selecting against certain fetuses through prenatal testing. What is it that we're keeping and what is it that we're rejecting from the human gene pool, or what kinds of individuals we would like to welcome into our future society and what kind of individuals were practically avoiding having. So I want to offer my comments through a critique of the title of this event designer genes, because I get phone calls from journalists every week to talk about these technologies to talk about the ethical and social dimensions of these technologies. And what do they all want to talk about designer babies, you know, I don't like designers in any field of life. But when you take the concept of designer and attach it to the baby, I think this is dangerous because I think it gets a lot of public attention and a lot of our social discourse and social debate that we should have urgently into the wrong direction. What do I mean, everybody's scared of having, so here's what's going on in the media right in the public imagination. We're going to have super intelligent babies, we're going to have tall babies, we're going to have blue eyes and blonde hair which always take offense because, you know, me. Why, why nobody wants to have. We're scared of enhancement we're scared of sort of selecting traits of future people in areas that have nothing to do with all the good stuff Robert talked about which is avoiding disease, and preventing suffering, and preventing early death. We're afraid of going in the direction of sort of designing human beings, but I think it's misguided to dedicate so much attention to it because we scientifically still don't know how to do that. Those traits that everybody's so worried about intelligence, height, sexual orientation. They're controlled by many genes, they're controlled by interactions between genes, and they're controlled by the interactions between our genomes and the environment through epigenetics and other processes. Even if we wanted to create a beautiful basketball player, we don't know how to do that. At the same time we're spending so much energy discussing this instead of discussing the really urgent question, which is within the area of medical uses, what is justified. So all these declarations and policy statements that Robert just mentioned, tell us that if we ever move forward responsibly with CRISPR that Hank explained, we should only do it for serious genetic diseases. Nobody today has defined what is a serious genetic disease, and I want the public conversation to be on that, because that is a question we're facing right now. He gave the twins resistance to the HIV virus. Is that serious enough to justify putting them at risk? A Russian scientist now wants to edit out the gene that causes hereditary deafness. Is that serious enough? How do we understand as a society, what is a serious disease that we all agree we'd rather not see in our children. We haven't actually had the deep conversation on that, and that conversation is urgent, whereas those designer genes are definitely not urgent because we don't know how to do it now, and potentially we'll never know how to do it. So these are my two cents. Well, you know, you might be unhappy to understand that an alternative title for our talk today was going to be cosmetic genetics. Yeah, no, it's a, it was intended to be a slightly polemical title to gather in both the serious part of this problem that you're highlighting really perfectly well. And the fact that some of it gets appropriated for other uses. Sure, thank you first. Hello to everyone. It's wonderful to be here. And actually, I can follow on Vardite's really thoughtful commentary with a couple of things, bringing a little bit of a historical perspective to the conversation. I completely agree. The other remarks so far that CRISPR has many important medical, medical applications and it's already had some some real medical benefits. It became almost almost overnight. It became a standard workhorse laboratory technique, you know, just basic research. Everybody was doing it's cheap. It's easy. So, yeah, we need to be sure to differentiate between the, the, the really kind of work a day use of of CRISPR just in doing it. All kinds of biomedical laboratory research and these kinds of sci-fi scenarios and and and and huge ethical issues that are raised with things like prenatal genetic diagnosis and so forth. I guess I would say two things in response to Vardite. One is the, she's absolutely right, of course, that we have no idea how to, how to create an added design of smarter baby or a taller baby or even estimates now range about out of sort of 20 to 25,000 human genes. The current estimates I've seen are about on the order of 1000 of those genes, one in, you know, about one in 20 genes influences intelligence somehow. It's not clear that this separation of genes and environment is actually how biology works. And so there's a risk. One of the risks that I see looking at this in a long term historical point of view over a couple of centuries is the, is the public effects of the social importance of these anxieties that we're talking about. The fact that we cannot do it, but people believe that we can has that has social and ethical ramifications itself. Right. And so these are questions of accurate science communication of myth busting. And, you know, and and desensationalizing the science where we can. The, I guess the other thing I could say right right now in the immediate responses. That the, I agree that that we should be that the important aspects of, you know, if we're going to edit embryos, we should be thinking about what diseases we can address profitably. You know, most and, and let's face it, most of those diseases if we're talking about embryos and future human beings as as Hank started as but, you know, most of those can be effectively and easily prevented with prenatal genetic diagnosis and, and abortion. Right. And so, in most cases it's probably not going to be practical to go in and just, you know, oh, I love this embryo all of it. It's got all the right genes except for that one snip that I want to fix. It's not. It doesn't, it doesn't work like that. The other thing is, but the line. I think, you know, most people, many people anyway are uncomfortable with the idea of enhancement. And, and our fate and most people are in favor of the idea of using the techniques to prevent disease. But the problem is the line between therapy and enhancement is really blurry. I like to use the example of human growth hormone, right, which can be used therapeutically if someone is considered to be extremely short stature now one has to note that in some cases conditions like a counterplace or a counterplastic dwarfism can like like deafness may be actually a desirable trait in certain communities. So we have to keep that in mind. But if you are thinking of a child as, you know, sort of pathologically short, okay, you can say that's a therapeutic application of human growth hormone. And then what if the child is, is, you know, quite below normal in the normal range, but the very bottom. Well, you could say there, there, you know, there are social costs to that and I would like to give my baby, you know, every advantage to succeed, every chance to succeed. So I'd like to be, you know, normal, or tired, or taller or her. And, you know, then we're in greater area that's a, it's a different kind of therapy surely, right, not so much medical is psychological and social. And, you know, where exactly how much is too much growth hormone is, are you then going to say to the, to the parent whose child is, is going to be a normal height that I want to give my child every advantage. And, you know, like, Julian Sabliescu says the, you know, appropriate to have been, beneficence we have a responsibility to provide the children with the best genetic environments that we can. Where do you draw that line, how much growth hormone, where does growth hormone become go from therapeutic to enhance to enhancement. So these are so the fuzzy lines between some of these categories is also where some of the big ethical issues. Really, you know, that's really where the rubber meets the road and what we're going to have to have, I think, really serious conversations to hash these things out pretty much on a case by case basis anyone, any cases. So, I'd like to pick up on a couple of things from both varded and Nathaniel. Varded said something that I say all the time, even though I'm about to criticize it, which is we need to decide, we need to figure out we need to do this we need to do that. But of course we also have to ask who is the we is the we individual parents. And if it's individual parents is it individual parents of normal height, or is it individual parents were both parents have a cadre plasia, and our very, our little people. Is it individual parents with good hearing or is it individual parents who are deaf. And if it's non individual parents but it's society as a whole, how do we do that. Varded actually, I mean, I think you're absolutely right that this issue of serious disease versus non serious disease on the one hand, or big risk versus acceptable risk unacceptable versus acceptable risk, just as Nathaniel's right that the line between enhancement and treatment gets very blurry, by the way, on the height issue. And the current medical standard is two standard deviations below the mean. So basically if you're in the lowest five percent, five percentile of height, you can get treated with human growth hormone, regardless of whether we know why you're so short. So that's obviously not a really compelling number they picked it because five is a nice number. Right. So we do see places that have tried to do the go in a more organized way the UK has a very complex system of regulation involving something called the human fertilization and embryology authority. And the HFEA is nothing in this discourse can avoid acronyms, everything's acronym here. And the HFEA actually decides what diseases you can do pre implantation genetic diagnosis for and which diseases you can't. And if you can't, if they decide you can't what happens in many cases at least of parents with enough money, is they come to the US to get it done. And the US as verdict said has no regulation on what can be done it's a matter of choice between the individual IVF clinic, and the parents, the parents with money, at least. The verdict I think is, is rightly focusing on what both varded and Nathaniel are talking about treatment versus enhancement in the US now there is no such enforceable line and if you can find a clinic that is willing to do something that's enhancing. And granted there's very little we can do and almost nothing legitimate that we can do with respect to intelligence or sports ability or music ability or math ability or all those, we could probably configure out light eyes versus dark eyes and light hair versus dark hair, but which versions of light hair or dark hair or light eyes or dark eyes we can't figure out. And the US, all you need is parents money and a clinic that's willing to try. And that's I think something the US and a social and governmental level needs to address. I can pick up on a few things from there. I'm sorry. Oh God, so you got our hand up first actually. Go ahead. I love how this conversation is flowing so directly following up on Hanks last words, who the we is is obviously the question. So we decided we and my research team decided to gather one possible group of week. We gathered experts from various disciplines and also people who live with genetic conditions. And we asked them to discuss what series is to them. And we discovered something very interesting at the level of the individual conversation conversations, for example, that patients or parents are having with clinicians about prenatal testing about what justifies going through IVF in order to do in order to test embryos. People resist hard definitions. They want the understanding of serious to remain something very personal, very subjective, because, you know, we have different, we come to different stories to the to these decisions. And for example, if several women in the family died of breast cancer, having an embryo with increased risk of this disease, even though it's later in life, even though it's just a risk. You know, you have resistance to that because you're traumatized by what you've lived. Whereas for another person who's not familiar with the disease, oh, it's just risk. It's not necessarily that this child will have it. And in any case, it's going to be much later in life. So, you know, it's just not that threatening. What is serious is contextualized is cultural is personal subjective and people wanted to remain that way. They don't want the government to tell them that this does not deserve to be screened because some, you know, political body decided it's not serious enough. However, there's another context where we have to make decisions as a society. What will be allowed or banned? What will be offered to patients or not mentioned? What will be funded? Or people will have to pay out of pocket. These are decisions we make as a society. And for these decisions, we must come to an agreement, even on questions that are so complicated, that maybe at some level, they should be left to individual decision making. So I just want to add that layer of layer of complexity to our conversation. I can just add a few points, and again, great conversation. So, an answer to Vardite's earlier comments about why such attention to IQ and for which diseases. First of all, it was quite interesting that the National Academy of Science at the Royal Society address this issue of which diseases. They thought once CRISPR for embryos is safe enough, it should be used and they actually came up with several categories. So they try to define this, but I think the ways they did it themselves raised questions. And they said, well, if both parents, or one of the parents has both genes that are autosomal dominant as they say for serious condition like Huntington's disease. So if someone had both parents with Huntington's disease, which is a fatal disease that, for which there's a very predictive gene. And so, if they thought that, and for in that situation, it would be permissible. They thought that if both parents were quote homozygous for a recessive disease so both parents had sickle cell disease or both parents had cystic fibrosis, then it would be acceptable. And they gave another example as well, which is if both parents were homozygous for different diseases that were autosomal dominant so both parents had genes for early onset Alzheimer's. The problem is, though, that if both parents, these are extremely extremely rare conditions, but I think the reason they are putting them forward is because there's a certain technological imperative. So I think it's not only the media and the public that's interested in how do we enhance children like how do we increase IQ but I might I'm concerned that scientists themselves are that there are some scientists and researchers please to feel we have this technology. Let's use it. This is what we've done in the past we have technology and so let's go ahead and use it. So for instance, with those cases, if both parents have Huntington's disease, they're probably knocking on the race of kids well, which is raised another question they probably won't live to reproductive age if they have Huntington's from both their parents. Same if they have both parents have sickle cell again it may be hard for them to retrieve productive age. So these are very hypothetical situations but the fact that they were put forth by the National Academy of Science and the Royal Society I think shows that there's pressure to leave the door open for scientific research in this area and I think that raises ethical questions itself. I would just say a few of the things which is one is who the we is at least the United States, the example here I think is that we is who's going to pay for right so in this country I think the ARG the assistive reproductive technology industry as I mentioned is seen as the best because it's paid for mostly out of pocket. So if you can afford to, you know, pay to have the breast cancer mutation look for in your embryos and those embryos that have it screened out, you get to do it. And again this raises questions of justice etc. There are other in Western Europe, a PGD is banned in some countries or it's very limited which cases can be covered because the National Health Insurance is covering it and so they have more of a say I think in what ends up happening. Again, just a couple of other thoughts that throw in the conversation. I think again the the the fact that the in this country the assisted reproductive technology is monitored by the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, which is a guild of those researchers, they come up live an ethics committee they come up with guidelines are not always followed. One problem in the US is that we did have guidelines and regulations there's concern among many researchers that the issues would be taken over by the researchers, which is just right. And by pro life, so they may say for instance you can't do any PGD, or they may get involved in other ways in preventing either infertile people from accessing these treatments or from PGD being used for getting rid of diseases and they want to screen out the embryos, there may be legitimate uses of PGD which may then be shut down as well so we're living in a precarious political time in some ways for the political body of our country to take these issues on the work note on what Robert just said in the US you also have the issue of is it a federal question, or is this state by state question. And this kind of regulation typically is state by state. I imagine you could probably construct a constitutional federal statute that might be a bit of a stretch of interstate commerce clause. But if you think of 50 states each with their own different regulatory schemes and the likelihood that Mississippi or South Dakota would have a different scheme from New York or California. It gets, it's very complicated very fast. We already have that with the problem of gestational surrogacy. So people quote renting wounds as it said, California has a large industry New York just voted to do our governor Cuomo the late governor for the recent former governor of the state. I'll go recently put it in place but it varies to state by state by state in all kinds of ways that lead to complexities people having children born in other states etc. I think you certainly have a declared politically dead not legally dead. Sorry about that. I wonder if you would all agree, and please don't if you don't. That in many of these instances there's a bit of an arbitrary. There needs to be a certain amount of arbitrariness and where the cutoff may be. I think that doesn't necessarily mean certain bodies shouldn't try to create a cutoff. But that perhaps it should be something that's open to revision over time. What have you I don't know what you all think about that if that's true or not. I'm going to jump in. I mean, I think this falls from Nathaniel was saying that often in medicine we think of diagnostic categories is being very clear. But in fact to a certain degree we construct these notions. What is serious disease, even what are the boundaries of disease one is someone everyone faces some anxiety and depression at some point in their life but one is someone quote unquote clinically depressed or need treatment for anxiety etc. And so nature is complicated but we try to apply these rigid categories and in some ways, it may not always be possible to do so. And so it was raised that in the case of the babies in China that he got involved with that of course it was an attempt to prevent HIV infectivity in those children but many of the critics said well there's a triple anti retro viral therapies and this is not a death sentence that had been many many years ago I wonder if the response would have been different if HIV was still the sort of fatal illness it was 25 years ago. I think it's fascinating to see how the ethical discussion reflection and even guidelines and recommendations change over time exactly Gerald in response to what you said. We learn more about the technologies, our social perceptions of what justifies certain interventions changes, for example, because we didn't have a treatment and now we do or because we realized that something is actually more detrimental than we thought. And it's just an opportunity to kind of plug in another, you know, more general point which is that the bio ethical conversations that we're having. Sometimes the public expects us as bio ethicists to make arguments come up with a position, tell everybody what to do, you know whether it's individual patients or governments and be done with it. And the people with the punches and the punches again can be the evolution of science and what we know, the accumulation of data, and the evolution of social values and norms look at the end of life debates that all countries are going through over the past decades and change legislation as our social values change. So I think when it comes to these questions that are inherently societal. What the next generation is going to look like is of course a personal question what child am I going to raise, but it's inherently a social question of the face of future society. We have to also be responsive to the science and to where social values are at a given time. And when I look at just the last six years of declaration and statements on CRISPR, you see that evolution happening right before your eyes. In 2015, there was an international summit and the general vibe was definitely no, not ready, dangerous, stay away. Only four or five years later, the, the, you know, the last thing off the press is talking about a responsible, translational pathway. All of a sudden, it's kind of obvious that we're going to translate this into the clinic, but how do we do it responsibly. We're seeing this evolution before our eyes. And what I'm struggling with because I do a lot of media is how to explain to the public that the fact bioethics, you know, shifts and changes and devolves is not because we're unreliable or capricious or we don't know what we're talking about. It's because we're taking into account all these changing factors. Of course, during COVID it was the big challenge one day, public health tells you mask the next day it tells you. We saw recommendations change, and we saw the bio ethical debate change, because we learned more about the virus. And it's the same in this arena we learn more about genetics. The public becomes better informed and educated the conversation changes, the bioethics evolves, and it's not easy to explain the sort of the backstory of how our conversations leading to all these international guidelines and statements. And what these are happening and what they're informed by. It's a very complex process but I think it's critically important that the public understands why we're sometimes shifting our positions towards more permissive or less permissive. Two things from what word it just said, and one has to do with the role of bioethicist some people look to bioethics for advice some people hate bioethicists because they view them as acting like black robed judges who say, this is good no you go to hell. In fact, I think you get three bioethicists talking about any issue and you end up with five different positions. So the we in bioethics is not unified we as well, but with respect to gene human germline genome editing, which is the fancy term for what who did. So it's editing human genes in a way that can be passed on to future generations. That's why it's different from just using gene therapy on me to fix a disease I've got, unless it gets into my sperm, and at this point, two 30 year old kids would go and a vasectomy even then it wouldn't matter for me, but unless it gets into somebody's sperm or eggs it's not going to affect it's not going to change the genes of the next generation. So it's the germline the eggs and sperm that make it that have raised this issue. I was part of some of those groups in 2015. Agreed then that this was not ready for prime time because it was not proven safe and effective. And that we haven't really talked about of all the ethical issues I think the least controversial and the most important is it's not just people to do something that's unreasonably unsafe, or to sell people something that's unreasonably ineffective safety and efficacy. We think of as FDA and not really ethical but they're, they're powerful powerful ethical issues. In 2015, everybody agreed that this wasn't safe and effective hadn't been shown safe and effective. Some people said, if it is shown safe and effective there may be some times in which it could be used. And that's where Roberts point about the particular diseases that this commission picked out. They were picking those out because those were things that pre-implantation genetic diagnosis couldn't fix, but maybe this could. So some people say if it's safe and effective, there are some ethical uses other people say even if it's safe and effective we should never use it because the germline is a line we shouldn't cross messing with our future generations is something we shouldn't do. That distinction remains, but it's become a little more exacerbated. I think the latest commission and the idea that we're moving to how to do it responsibly. Those are the people who say if it's proven safe and effective but it hasn't yet been proven safe and effective. Here's some ways it could be used. There's still the whole, there's a large set of people in bioethics and otherwise they say it should never be used at all for any reason. So, the, I think the, the discussion has evolved, but what was a more obscure and more nascent division six years ago is becoming a little clearer now between those who say never and those who say, well maybe under some circumstances. But right now everybody, almost everybody says it's not proven safe and effective. It's not ready for primetime you shouldn't try to make babies in something that's this manner that is this risky. I would just say, I'm sorry Robert I think Nathaniel had a point you wanted to make. Oh, I was just going to say that the points and Hank just made our super important I'm really glad you erased them so so clearly and articulately. I would say that it's important to remember that safety and advocacy aren't the only two ethical issues that are involved here. And I think sometimes in discussing these issues with people, numbers of the scientific community, the ethical discussions sort of end there once it's safe and effective then you know, then it's out of our hands you guys deal with it. And there are, there are other important ethical questions to keep in mind while we're thinking about safety and advocacy as well. For example consensus, you know what what is there, you know how do we decide that if there's a social consensus that this kind of thing should be allowed the FDA ultimately is supposed to go supposed to go along with by the will of the people. We have to we're going to have to record reconcile this right. And that raises the question that actually comes back to some of the verdicts comments on the last comments, which is where we've been raising a number of issues around the issue of informed consent, right. And we haven't, I don't think we've used that phrase yet but we've all been talking about it. And what counts as informed when we're talking about technologies that are so, you know, so new so powerful and so complex, right, is really difficult to identify we have, we take informed consent as kind of this gold standard of ethical, ethical behavior. And what does it mean to be informed, you know, if you do a, if you take a 23 and meet test, they, they can send you back there's a, there's a set of snips that apparently are possible. And apparently are correlated with an increase in seven points seven IQ points. Right. And I don't know the name of the gene maybe some of you do. But, but this is what people are told. And then, as I'm sure everybody on the panel is well aware, people mistake probability for certainty right people don't understand probability. And then you've got a polygenic score that says you're, you know, 80% less likely to finish college than someone with, you know, a higher polygenic score. People think, Oh my God, my kids going to be going to be done going to drop out of high school. What do I do is probably going to be more inclined toward criminal behavior and and drug use and all sorts of bad things that correlate with low, you know, lower educational attainment for years in school. So there's some really important issues here, you know, around the question of informed consent and the informed part. What, what counts as informed when we're talking about genetics and these complex behavioral traits not now I'm going beyond at the moment. So, you know, we're talking about, you know, relatively simple cases like Alzheimer's disease or even cystic fibrosis and thinking more about say mental traits on schizophrenia or, or, or mental retardation or depression, things that are extremely complicated biology biologically as we've said. And so, we told that you can, you know, you can get people to tell you that that they can give you the genetic answer to your likelihood for schizophrenia and no matter how often they say, this is just a probability. People think, Oh my God, you know, my child's going to be schizophrenia. There's some really important issues here with the question questions surrounding informing the public people can't make good decisions we need to let people make the wrong decisions we can't, or obviously not going back to a state run eugenics program, but any kind of, you know, sort of liberal sort of program of allowing individuals to make these kinds of decisions hinges upon being actually informed and what that means is far from clear when we're talking about complex traits. Right. I'm sorry Robert I think had a question first. Yeah, just a few thoughts. I'm on from my phone, the LinkedIn work for my computer so it's hard to raise hands exactly but a few thoughts. One is I think just get back to the issue of risk. A problem is that risks themselves are not always clear we're talking about potential future risks and so in we need to weigh not just the benefits of using the technology but the risks will be and as mentioned some of the reports that have come out and said you know when it's safe enough safe enough is not a black and white line to know that the procedure is safe enough meaning following people for a generation or two, in other words if we create a child using this technology that they are not adverse effects on that child and perhaps that child's child for instance, and I think there are even in other kinds of research the FDA has gotten to controversy sometimes in terms of deciding when the benefits are sufficiently out out are sufficiently outweigh the risks whatever they are so it's even there there's some subjectivity involved. And so rather there's still a lot we don't know. So even with IQ for instance as mentioned my understanding is from scientists I trust that among the however many than been hundreds certainly of genes looked at for IQ, the one that's been most powerful I've heard gives you so just one of my two tests. So again many many genes involved and another problem is there's a sociologist whose work I admire peer Conrad who wrote a paper called Why has the gene for alcoholism been discovered five times. And it turns out that five times the New York Times reported the gene for alcoholism has been discovered, and only of course to have it reported somewhere buried in later pages, several months or years later that in fact, that was not replicated in a long history of claims for genes being associated with traits and diseases that are not replicated because if we look at a group of hundred people who have a disease and a group of hundred people who don't we look at literally the genes we're going to find some genes that are present in the one group, but not the other and some researchers may say well that's the cause when it's not. In terms of informed consent I think it gets even trickier when we're talking about designing future people obviously they can't consent so there have been cases some apocryphal some reported where deaf parents for instance have said I want to use P G D pre implantation genetic diagnosis to have a deaf child or dwarf parents have said I want to create a dwarf child because we feel these are not disabilities and we feel that this is the child we want. And again there too obviously the child can't decide for him or herself the child's not yet been born, which I think raises mistakes even more because there may be doctors who say yes I'm willing to do key G D for that purpose the parents may want it the child obviously is not there to say no we also have so called savior siblings where we have a child or parent who is a terrible disease and needs bone bone marrow transplants for instance so we can use the parents who P G D create a child will be a match to create sufficient bone marrow to serve as a donor obviously that child doesn't have a say in it so I think we need to be extra careful and I think that's an important role for bioethicists to play. Lastly just to put on the table I think one of the concern you that hasn't been mentioned is eugenics or it's been mentioned a little bit but you know when we've tried in the past historically to alter the genes of our society, it's led to disastrous results obviously with the Nazis and eugenics actually started in the United States in the 1920s there were efforts as waves of immigrants came from southern Europe Eastern Europe, there were eugenics fairs in the Midwest to give awards not just to the biggest pumpkin and the best pig but the best genealogy mean read you know was genealogist I think again culturally these are I think forming a background of why they're such interest in improving genes and why we need to be careful. So, taking the conversation, first of all, to another level higher level of complexity on one hand, and on another hand from the science fiction to the here and now. So we talked about what if someday we can use CRISPR safely and effectively combine that capacity with uses that are socially very controversial, what are we going to do that. But there's something that we can already do now and actually some private companies are beginning to sell it to prospective parents and that scares people like Hank and myself very much and that relates to the use of the well established technology of screening embryos in vitro before deciding which one to implant, not to look at one gene that causes a disease, but rather to look at multiple genes that increase in to various degrees, the risks of the more prevalent diseases of our disease, diabetes diseases that you know pop at a population level, we're really trying to tackle as a public health issue. Now, if you have imagine that you have 10 embryos in vitro and as parents, you know that there's a genetic disease that is very serious running in your family and the result of this test is here are the far five embryos that will be sick as children that carry the gene and the other ones will not suffer from this disease. Now you choose, you know, it's a sort of a simple decision because you tested from the beginning to screen against that gene right now imagine that for each of those 10 embryos, you get a map that tells you that for a heart disease, the risk will be at this percentage for these kinds of issues, but so that's a little higher over the general population but for diabetes, you're actually going to get for the same embryos lower than the general population Let's look at a variety of you know 10 other diseases and for each one you're going to get a different risk score, but also with different nuances within that risk score, no embryo of the 10 will be perfect or clean or free of risks, because we all including us on the screen, we all carry problematic genes And so what are we going to do with the reproductive decision making when each time we screen embryos, we face what I called at one point an avalanche of information that is extremely complicated, multi-dimensional And we don't have an obvious choice because one of those embryos is perfect, they all carry some problem, so we're really scared of such a future because on one hand we always say, oh more information is better, but at some point more information might actually become a disaster, how do we identify that one I think it's important for people to appreciate that what you're referring to a Bardeed is that there are certain diseases and many of the more common chronic diseases, many of them very serious have their polygenic there's not one or two genes that are associated with that condition There was a seminal paper about schizophrenia, some eight years ago that said they located at least 108 genes that were associated with some risk of schizophrenia, and they were still trying to work out now to what degree these various numerous genes have to interact with one another or be exposed to certain environmental circumstances that would raise the risk of schizophrenia in that individual, on the other hand, without doubt many of those 108 genes and there probably are more may confer some increased fitness, they have there are qualities among those genes that are all over the gene pool for all of us and which are probably good for us, so right it's much more complex the question then would be how do we educate people or who would be the who would be responsible for educating them so that they would understand this or be able to make better decisions or not be offered the option to be to make the decision. Thank you're muted. Okay, first time this week. Wow. That's pretty good it's Saturday I made it almost through the week without messing up my muting. So two things. One on this issue of the riskiness of particular genetic variations and I'm really glad that I've already brought up the PRS this polygenic risk score point. There are some things traits or diseases where it is really where a particular genetic variation is really, really powerful so if you've got more than 40 CAG repeats on your Huntington and Jane, the only way you're not going to die of Huntington's disease is to die first from something else. And then every other disease trait condition etc seems to have some genetic influence, but it's really complicated. And so you got if you did say whole genome sequencing you could look at 6000 or 10,000 different genes that are associated with particular rare diseases where special variations caused the disease with a high degree of confidence either 100% or something like BRCA one or two mutations which increase a woman's risk of breast cancer to about 80% increase the ovarian cancer risk from 1% to 30% in other ways is more significant even though we think of it as a breast cancer gene. And then you've got these statistical things looking at variations, not even an individual genes or sequences but at variations in markers, a million markers across the genome, and coming up with this controversy and sickening machine learning algorithms or artificial intelligence on them. And coming up with these numbers that are very scientifically uncertain, but are being sold to prospective parents already so you've got the known high risk for some things genes, which may also have unknown benefits as well. And then you've got this machine learning algorithm constructed gamish of a whole bunch of different markers. That's an important distinction to keep in mind, particularly since we're seeing the commercialization of the latter one I think way too prematurely. And I wanted to say is to go back to Robert and the consent of the embryo. Obviously right. On the other hand, I can't remember the consent for my sign saying, yeah I'd like to be born. And by the way I'd like to be born to this couple in Columbus, Ohio, etc, etc. You know I'm a parent. There's only three so we've survived not only childhood but teenagers, I've survived they've survived. We do all sorts of things without our kids consent. It's our job, you know you don't say, well, here are the advantages and disadvantages if you go into bed right now. And I want to make sure you fully understand them before you make the decision. It's your bedtime and what I swore I would never do before I had kids was do what my parents did and of course I broke this oath. Why, after 17 different wise, because I say so. At some point parents do those things. I do agree that the fact that the embryo can't consent makes it a higher raises the issues more highly but at some point. And so parents not only do but that's our job, in some sense and try to mold these babies these embryos feeders and babies into good happy loving people. So I think though the deafest example in particular is really interesting I have mixed feelings about whether a deaf couple should be able to choose a deaf embryo as opposed an embryo that would grow up to be deaf as opposed to embryos that wouldn't. I have no mixed feelings about whether a deaf couple should be able to, you know, artificially deaf and a child that's been born with hearing. I'm fairly sure that it's a defense that I have a defensible line there between birth after birth and before birth. In the second case you call Child Protective Services and the police. In the first case it feels different to me. But I'm not sure how I come out on it. Robert yeah I know you wanted to make a comment even before. Thanks comments so go take it we'll take it away. Yeah so I think that children are entitled to an open future as it's been said. So we don't want to be making it's one thing to say this is your bedtime you have to go to bed why because it's your bedtime and you have to go to bed. And to biologically sort of constrict and otherwise open future that a child would have within the range of open futures that are available to children so I think if we don't want to forcibly impose risks on children. When we otherwise don't need to and I think that's sort of the spirit in which I think that we need to be careful about and I should say some of this can be addressed through research to see children who were selected to be so called save your siblings. How do they feel about it we don't know. I feel I feel great I was created to be able to manufacture bone marrow for my sibling or my parent, where they may feel what a pain in their butt I mean I were pain in the hip I'm being you know having a needle shoved in my hip every few months to extract bone marrow so again I think empirical data can help somewhat think about some of these issues. I wanted to come back to the issue with understanding genetics also though because I think one, one problem is that as Hank said commercialization is playing a huge role in the space for deep mentioned with companies that are selling sort of polygenic risk score tests of parents into physicians. There's a lot of money to be made here by our companies are making a lot of money and so they're often I think the ones pushing the agenda even when it may not be in the consumer the patient the perspective parents best interest. And this affects not only perspective parents and patients but providers too so there are tests being sold to psychiatrists now and psychiatrists are buying them genetic tests to predict the risk of someone being in the hospital and the report comes back and it's also available to consumers as well they can have this test that you have an increased or decreased risk or increased or normal risk of schizophrenia. And what increased means is that your risk goes from 1% if it doubles to 2% which means that the average population risk is say 1% of schizophrenia if you test positive for this gene it doubles to 2% well people may just see you have twice the risk of schizophrenia and get scared seeing the so called road of risk without understanding that. So that's an absolute risk means that the chance goes to 1% to 2% that is as there's a otherwise in 99% chance you won't have schizophrenia to a 98% chance you won't have schizophrenia so I think we need to educate the public about statistics about science in general, not just regarding this, but in overall. And I think this is an area that has also not gotten as much attention as it should, and that I think would help us be able to deal with this in other areas where questions of our use of technology comes up. Nathaniel? Yeah, following up on Robert's comments, I wanted to raise the question of the ethical issues surrounding the free market. We have a very laissez-faire attitude toward economics in this country, and as someone said earlier, there's basically an unregulated market for PGD. And there's also an unregulated market for genetic testing, for genetic entertainment, for spitting in a tube and getting a report for just about any trait you can name or behavior, you can get someone to give you one of those risk scores. So there's a whole lot to be said about that. Maybe I'll come back to that later, say that for later in the conversation. But I did want to raise the question of the ethical issues surrounding the free market where a lot of decisions are made that we would oftentimes put under the heading of informed consent that are in fact strongly affected by things that we know have large psychological pressure, like advertising and peer pressure and so forth. So if you're marketed a test that promises to tell you what your IQ is going to be, what your children's or diseases are going to be, what so forth and so on, there's not really much, there are only very broad guidelines about what can be said and what can't. And I'm not an economist, so I mostly want to raise the question and see if the rest of you had thoughts on the marketing aspects of the new genetic technologies. Radi, you want to respond to that? Yes, so one technology that we haven't talked about so much yet and is actually one of the fastest spreading technologies with millions and millions of women around the world using it, even though it's only been around for about a decade, is a new way of testing fetuses during the pregnancy, but early on and without invading the uterus and causing a risk of miscarriage just by a simple blood test of the pregnant woman. And this is a technology that we call non-invasive prenatal testing, another acronym HANK and IAPT. And the reason I want to bring it up is that my research group has done a lot of thinking about the ethical and social dimensions of this technology. And we've been talking to pregnant women, to families and especially to families raising children with trisomy 21 or Down syndrome because this is one of the main conditions that this technology targets. And what we're hearing is that sometimes, you know, Nathaniel talked now about unconscious mechanisms, how we respond to societal pressures, economic pressures, but some people are telling us that they're very conscious of these pressures. For example, they say, I would love to welcome into our family a child with Down syndrome, but society will not provide me with the support mechanisms that I need. What happens to my child when I'm too old to take care of him or her? I don't want the child to become a burden on their siblings. We won't have enough financial support. So sometimes the same pressures that Nathaniel mentions are very explicit in people's decisions about terminating certain pregnancies, not because they think that the condition in itself is, as we said, very serious or the quality of life will be so terrible that they don't think it's a life worth living, but because they feel society would either not support their decision or that they would be judged and criticized. So when we say in front consent, what about free consent? When are we actually free to make these decisions knowing that we live in a society that would support us and our child because it's a society that has diversity, that appreciates diversity, that has a high degree of tolerance towards difference, or are all these technologies gradually closing up what we consider to be acceptable so that only Savalesca's best children deserve to be born and the parents will be judged for even having them. And the last point I want to make today is a story. A nurse once came to me after a talk that I gave about this technology, about NIPT, and said, you know, I'm coming back from a shift now and we were in the ER. A couple arrived with a very young child suffering from a disease and the first thing I heard the doctor tell them is you didn't test. What did the doctor mean? Didn't you test this fetus before it was born to find out that it had this disease and therefore terminate? What was implicit in the question? Why am I even seeing this child? The child shouldn't be here. So the first reaction the parents get when they rush to the hospital with a sick child is your child shouldn't even be here. We have technologies in place to screen out this child before birth. Why are you creating a burden on me and on society? And that's my last word of caution because all these technologies can push us into that corner and that's my greatest fear. Ankh, I think you had a comment also. Yes, and I'm actually not muted. So really three quick things. First, I think Nathaniel's question about the role of the free market is a very important one and particularly the role of the free market and an increasingly constitutionally protected world of advertising where the Supreme Court has held more and more so-called commercial speech is actually protected by the Constitution. We are one of only two countries in the world that allows advertising of prescription drugs. I don't know why New Zealand does it but I think I know why we do it because it makes a lot of people including a lot of media outlets a lot of money and it sells things and I think the problem of consent is not just a problem of advertising but the two exacerbate each other. Second, the disability points and I'm glad that you just talked about it at some length. To me, they're the hardest issues in this whole area. There's one set that gets a fair amount of attention because it's kind of titillating or exciting and that should the deaf parents be able to have deaf kids or should a cadre-placic parents be able to have little people, children. It's significant. I don't want to dismiss the importance of that but it's relatively minor in terms of the percentage of the population involved. There are a lot of disabilities out there and I had I was on a panel once with a Stanford graduate, a woman with something called spinal muscular atrophy, genetic disease. It comes in a variety of different degrees of seriousness. Some are fatal early, her's header in a wheelchair from about 18 on and we were talking about this stuff in a panel and she said, well what do people are saying is I should never have been born. I sure as hell didn't want to say yes, that's what we're saying. So of course I sort of intentionally side-stepped and said, well no, what people on that side are saying is that you should have been born but without your disease and she being a very smart person immediately said well without my disease I would not have been me. I don't know where we go with that. I mean that's sort of the if on the one hand I don't see any problem with preventing the birth of children who have just really inevitable nasty awful diseases, Tay-Sach's disease or Lesch-Nihan where children are intellectually disabled and at the age two they start chewing on their hands and feet and disfigure themselves. These are terrible things but when you get into the the gray area I can see why parents wouldn't want to have a child with SMA but should we stop them from doing that because of the people who have SMA or wouldn't want to have a child with Down syndrome should we stop them from doing that because of the people who have children with Down syndrome or the people who have Down syndrome and not just the psychological effect on them of knowing the world thinks I shouldn't have been born but the shortage the diminution of research funding going into the area physicians specializing in their treatment social support for their condition all those are real problems that the ability to avoid the birth of people with certain disabilities brings to the people who have already been born or will in the future be born with those disabilities and then finally earlier this week on Wednesday we saw pretty much the herd pretty much the death now for Roe v Wade sounded at the US Supreme Court the only question I think at this point is when in June they come out with the decision it will eliminate Roe entirely or just say well right now we're just saying up to 15 weeks you can ban it after 15 weeks and we'll deal with the others later I think there's a really interesting question about how the death of Roe v Wade is going to affect the assisted reproduction field industry whichever you prefer and the use of genetics and the possible uses of genetics afterwards so there's a big one to throw on the table Robert you have another oh yes i love it Robert had a question he wanted the or a comedy one of the make and i want to let him do that and then we could open up the floor to some questions right just a few quick comments interestingly in terms of the pro-life movement and the religious right when pgd was developed that is screening embryos those clinicians were concerned that the religious right might shut them down and in fact what happened is that people on the right felt gee if i can afford to have a better child i should have the right to do so so what's interesting is that a certain libertarian attitude prevailed that has allowed some of the things that we're actually concerned about as well as potentially some benefits beneficial things like pgd out there so i think it's hard to break what's going to happen though i certainly worry a lot about the future of ro v wade as hank was just saying just on nipt the sort of way of looking at the genes of the fetus just by taking blood from the mother's arm one issue that comes up with that which is what vardy was talking about a few minutes ago that has a lot of folks i know concerned is that those tests often give the results of say 70 different diseases and the actual sort of validity of those tests for all seven diseases has not been determined so patients again are coming in with these reports look at all the diseases the 70 diseases that the test showed that i have and they say to their their obgyn what do i do with this information and often doctors themselves are not sure you know should i abort the fetus or not given it that it has a say you know 30 or 40 percent chance of having whatever the disease is because these are not always predictive tests unlike in the case of downs where we're much more able to predict it so again a lot of confusing issues i would just say with the free market question that nephaniel raised we have a free market we also have an fda and we do have concerns about protecting consumers protecting patients protecting their rights as well and i think for those who are not familiar with bioethics this is a lot of what bioethics is is often trying to weigh conflicting principles and conflicting issues well this has been a very stimulating talk so far i hate to jump in um but we do have some questions that we want to start with a question yes it for for all these considerations it seems the genie is really out of the bottle though and it's going to affect family psychology sociology theology etc and one sort of non sci-fi horror is you could imagine a child saying mommy why didn't you take the gene out for my adhd i mean there are going to be so many different kinds of reverberations about what one didn't do even from the child's point of view as well as what one did do so we're in for quite a ride but thank you you you were all just marvelous i really appreciate the thoughtfulness and consideration great thank you berylline all right Alex you want to uh Beverly thank you so Alex you want to uh start to read some of these questions and see what the panelists have to say and respond uh yeah yeah and um everyone watching on zoom and youtube on zoom you could write in questions on the bottom panels you see it buttons this q&a and then on youtube just you could write it in the comments so from al danielle on youtube um they're wondering i mean given everything you talked about do you think there's anything you could add when you look at trauma so any given the intergenerational effects of pdsd the epigenetics so do you think there's any comments you could add given that frame i know you've talked about every other possible disease or what have you that could occur so anything to add there i would just say that for most psychiatric can you hear me yes for most psychiatric conditions uh the genetics are much more complicated and the gene environment interactions are much more complicated so it's easier to find genes for cancer say than it is for most psychiatric conditions including pdsd so i think we're just uh the genetics of that i think are far away from our understanding at the moment and i'd add i think the questioner may have also been interested in the epigenetics which is not so much the sequence itself but the way the sequence gets expressed because of things that are above the the sequence that determine when it gets when certain genes could use or not the existence and extent of effort of inherited epigenetic markers and humans is very unclear and very controversial it's not and it would really be very hard to test for example the extent to which epigenetic markers may have some role in children of somebody with pdsd having issues one thing that is quite clear though is we pass on things to our kids in lots of ways that don't have anything to do with our genes an apparent with pdsd or apparent with a mental illness or apparent with a physical disability is changing those conditions are going to affect how the kid grows up in a sense this goes back to roberts argument about an open future our our characteristics as parents to some extent and where we're born and what country and what socioeconomic status and so uh these all close in our children's futures and affect our children's futures in ways that are usually much more important except for the few really unfortunate outliers who get some really nasty early onset genetic disease these are much more important than what genes we pass on I think also we might have another panel some years hence to discuss the ethical uh contour uh confusion sown by epigenetic manipulation uh that that technology is not really here yet but it's coming okay thank you yay all for that question next we have carol gerson who has a comment then a question so the comment goes I once asked the fertility doctor to whom do you say no and his answer was pretty much no one and then her question based on how she wrote in the q&a part I assume this is her question um was supposed one is not a consequentialist who is primarily concerned about unintended negative consequences of unregulated gene editing how does the panel think about arguments from thinkers like michael sandell or william may that gene editing encourages us to use values appropriate for evaluating manufacture things to pierce ends and that this undermines the basis for human dignity inequality etc um I think this throws us back to a distinction that hank put on the table between those who think that gene editing is inherently a bad idea for variety reasons but it's not about the safety or the efficacy it's just that as a species we should not start to meddle and mess up at the level of designing our own DNA here I finally did work the the work design into a comment we should not try to intentionally design our DNA either because you take a theological position that we shouldn't play god or because you think that it would never be safe enough or because you think deontologically there are certain things humans should not do because it violates human dignity those people have already made up their mind right so to them it's not about where is the science going what is the condition that we're targeting what about off-target when will we be ready for first in human clinical trials to them you know the decision has been made but I think if I look at you know the community of thinkers that's a minority and the majority of bioethical thinking is about those questions that I just mentioned where is the science how do we define safety and efficacy and especially what genes do we want to target once it is safe enough so you know that that minority that sees this as inherently forever something that should be banned there's no conversation there right it's not about anything that's going to change it's just an in principle position that the shuts down the conversation about the technology I would just add I would put Vordid said Hank early on mentioned mitochondria replacement therapy which is that a small amount of human genes are not in the so-called nucleus of the cell but in mitochondria and scientists have developed ways of using another woman's sort of mitochondria so to speak through mitochondria placement therapy and this is altering the genes arguably of a future child to prevent terrible diseases and I think that there is some distinction morally between using these technologies to prevent terrible diseases versus adding some IQ points or some of the other milder conditions that we're talking about and I think that distinction is something that a lot of people find helpful. So going back to the argument that Sandell and May made and that was referred to in the question you know I think Sandell makes that argument as well as it can be made I don't personally find it very compelling or convincing in two ways one I look at people who were born as a result of indetra fertilization the same arguments about viewing children as a commodity as a manufacturer as a product were made 40 years ago with respect to IVF. I typically in the seminar undergrad seminar I do these days I have usually at least one or two people who are IVF kids they don't seem different they don't seem unloved they don't seem viewed as a manufacturer as an it's actually an empirical statement about how people are going to react to these sorts of technologies that I think that we have no evidence to believe it's that the technologies are changing the way people look at their children viewing them as less gifts and more products to be perfectly designed and you know return to return to manufacture if you know to get your money back if it didn't work out right. The other side of it is you know parents have kids for all sorts of different reasons parents have kids because they need somebody to work on the farm parents have kids used to and in some societies still do parents have kids to provide for them when they're old and in firm if there's no social security parents have kids because it seemed like a good idea at the time parents have kids without even intending to have kids there are all sorts of reasons parents have kids whether this argument saying parents will view and treat their children differently as a result of this I haven't seen any evidence for it I don't find it compelling. Great Alex the next question. Thank you Carol and I just want to add my parents had me just so I could open up PDFs for them I'm kidding I know how to do that. I know how to do that. I believe that. Okay so then you Carol then we have anonymous sorry hold on we have an anonymous a questioner on zoom and they asked is it even feasible to test the efficacy and safety of germline editing in an ethical manner. So let me take that on I I wrote a book about the CRISPR babies called CRISPR people that came out this past February and there's a whole chapter devoted to if you did want to try to prove it was safe and effective how would you go about it and you would go about it I think using the sort of things that the FDA normally wants but pretty particular focus and and more than usual requirement for proof given that you're dealing with the birth of infants who haven't been able to consent. One thing you would do is non human animal studies and you need more than mice and rats for this I think you've got to use non human primates certainly monkeys follow them for a couple of generations look to see is and use large numbers hundreds because if you're looking for say a 5% problem you're not going to see it if you only use 10 and you may not see it if you use 20. So do germline editing in a couple hundred rhesus macaques and see what the results are in terms of the health of the babies as well as the efficacy of the actual editing. Do human embryo studies where you modify the embryos and then watch to see watch them as long as you are allowed to up to 14 days under current guidelines maybe longer in the future depends in part also on what your restriction you're in and see if they look normal if they act the way same way that normal human embryos act but then at some point you've got to hold your breath cross your fingers or assault over your shoulder you know launch prayers do whatever else you do and go to first assuming everything all that work all that preclinical work says we don't see any real big issues here you have to try it in humans and you try it in a small number of humans who are very carefully studied and typically I think you would try it in the humans for whom the need seems most strong and see what happens will you wait for 70 years no how long will you wait that's a good question it could well be that every baby born from IVF will drop dead at age 44 because Louise is now 43 no reason to think that they will but we can't know until we wait it out nobody's going to wait that long but yes I think there are ways to try to try to not prove safety not prove not prove unacceptable risk proving a negative is always problematic but there are ways to try to get some more confidence that this could be done in a relatively safe way buried in mind that safety is always a relative term I mean as good as guidelines are not much different than the ones you might rely on for just drug development yes that's right although a problem with this is it is not entirely clear whether or not those FDA rules apply to this kind of work the FDA has taken the position that it does going back to the early cloning hysteria I took the position in 1980 I'm sorry in 2000 that cloning would be a clone human embryo would be a drug or biological product subject to FDA jurisdiction that's never been tested in court I think they probably should win on that but I can certainly imagine a federal judge saying wait you're telling me that a human embryo is a drug get out of there where does it say that in the 1938 federal food drug and cosmetic act Robert it's not clear that that legally FDA would have that power I think it should and I hope it does and I agree with everything Hank said but to answer the question I would also add it's not clear that there is enough benefit to justify the risk yet in other words for what medical condition would we even do the things that Hank rightly says would need to be done and I think that as I mentioned they report from the National Academy of Science saying well if both parents had Huntington's disease that it's not clear that that ever happens in the west and so again it's good to keep an open mind but I think we need to be careful that we don't rush into this for the wrong reasons which is capitalism sort of pushing us there. I think we should move on to the next question I was going to think we should move on to the next question because we have a quite a number of questions I think Alex have I read you this is of two more all right so let me let me follow up on Robert I think one plausible example of a need would be a couple where both members have cystic fibrosis the life expectancy for cystic fibrosis used to be under 10 it's now people in their 40s every decade it seems to get a decade longer which is a nice thing it's still not a good disease you don't want to have it it's a real problem to deal with and life expectancy is shorter and morbidity is higher but people live into their 20s 30s and 40s and some of them are going to be healthy enough that they want to have kids and I think it's not irrational unrealistic to think that two people with CF will meet bond and decide they want to marry and have kids together we're not to have kids together they would say the only way we can have a child that would not have cystic fibrosis is to use genome editing so I would just say I don't know of any documented cases of people of a couple where both have cystic fibrosis wanting children maybe it's out there but IVF docs I've talked to say this is a hypothetical yes yeah no known case to have happened thus far not a good disease but if people have if treatments are getting better for CF there are people who if someone's making it to 50 60 with CF do we need to be getting rid of the disease this gets back to the issue if it's not that bad that people are making it to 60 and want to have kids along the way should we be getting rid of it so again just to make sure the parents for the government right for the bioethicists yeah I'm just saying we need to think about the bioethicists right you know the relative risks and benefits and what would the benefits be it's your Alex next question um yeah so thank you anonymous viewer uh this is some Charles Barkowski and he asked what's the current understanding of ALS genetically I could just add as an addendum to that I know pathologically it has to do with um epicordination problems so epicordinated proteins not being properly disposed of in the cells and then the buildup of that leads to um cell death so anyone want to add on to that I know a little bit about this if somebody knows a lot about it I would be happy to defer but I think it's like a lot of diseases a few cases are powerfully caused by a known genetic variation in this case it's a mutation in a gene called SOD2 sodium oxidase dismutease or something might be SOD1 I forget whether it's SOD1 or SOD2 and that makes up one or two percent of patients with ALS there are a whole bunch of other genetic variations that increase your risk of ALS but not enormously and then there are a whole bunch of patients with ALS who have no genetic no known genetic predisposition at all almost every disease almost every common disease seems to fall into that pattern Alzheimer's there are some genetic mutations that give you a hundred percent chance of early onset Alzheimer's it's about one person in a thousand carries them there's a genetic variation that 20% of the population carries that doubles your risk of Alzheimer's but most people with Alzheimer's don't have either of those risk factors so ALS is partially heavily genetic but the SOD1 gene partially weakly genetic with a bunch of other genes and as far as we can tell partially not genetic at all and and we're going to see that we are seeing that more and more with disease Alex you want to get to the last question for us um let's see on YouTube okay yeah this is the last question on zoom anonymous viewer asks how common is finding a doubling of maternal or paternal DNA when companies like 23andMe do testing you mean a false paternity is that the person further wrote I asked because I was found to be a half sibling to my sister and brother although the most likely explanation is a different bio father I've read that a doubling of one's parents DNA is another explanation I've not heard of it I mean 23andMe as I understand it usually if they say you're only a half sibling of someone who thought was your sibling that the vast majority of those cases are due to so-called quote false paternity that is that there are surprising number of people I've heard reports a good 1% of the population they find that the person they thought was their father was not their father I should add I wrote a book called Designing Babies how technologies change in the ways we create children and in that I looked at people who were created through sperm donation or egg donation and the vast majority of those people are never told by their parents they were created by sperm or egg donation most men don't want to say I was infertile I was impotent women also are afraid to say we created using someone else's egg their parents are afraid the child will love them less so that's turned out not to be the case and so people are not told and are now finding out through 23andMe that in fact they were not from the genes of one of their parents but rather there was an egg or sperm donor use in some way I think that's the most likely thing. Yeah Vardeed I think you had a comment. Yeah it would be inappropriate to finish this pandas interesting conversation without noting the dangers of going through direct to consumer testing without understanding the potential things you might learn people think of it as fun you know somebody will tell me how fast I metabolize caffeine or that I'm you know I have 5% indigenous that I didn't know about oh that's curious that's fun but they don't realize that sometimes the results come with a disaster with information that can be disastrous for family relationships for their psychology for their identity so this is an interesting opportunity to mention a book that Hank edited that just came out I received it just received it in the mail it's hard to see it's called consumer genetic technologies ethical and legal considerations and in it is a chapter a fascinating chapter about a family that went through this fun testing and found out that they have a half sister they never knew about and it turns out their mother was raped as a young woman had a child and gave up this child's for adoption and then decades later the story emerges and throws the entire family dynamics into havoc and exposes a secret that the mother kept her whole life so just fascinating fascinating example of things that can come up unintended people don't think about this in advance they just send out their DNA and think this will be fun so a big you know red flag and a warning to all of us before we just use this testing for fun to think through all the things that might happen I feel the need to give a disclaimer I was one of four co-editors on that book along with Nita Farahani Glen Cohen and Carmel Chacar and I was clearly the one who did the least work so it's it's a good book probably because I did so little work on it and it has a lot of chapters from great people including I think uh pardon ah Bravo now anyone have any other sort of last comments they want to add yeah I just want to get Vicki Madden's comment on YouTube just so she knows that we're paying attention it's just no it's no question it's the comments she just noted that um when I think during one of the question answer responses um she noted that the issues raised about privilege are already visible they move from an affluent area to a more socially mixed area and they they experience an increase in people with Down syndrome and other conditions and they sort of related that to affluent couples not having as many kids as the less affluent couples so just want to thank Vicki for that comment well I would just say it's affluent couples are more able to afford these technologies I mean IVF is expensive uh insurance cover is very little of it uh and I think that's that's a major problem are the justice issues or the injustice issues and the fact that the gap these technologies are being used so far at least in the US in ways that I think unfortunately increase the gaps between the haves and have nots. So it feels like we're getting toward the end um and maybe each of us could take a shot at something we think is really important that hasn't been discussed and I'm preemptively going to do that because I'm on a I've got a I'm on a hobby horse right now I think that our species has many characteristics but one of the strongest is we do not lack for self-esteem we are very species centric and we are paying way too much attention in my mind to the effects of these technologies when they're used for human reproduction which I think is going to lag in part because they're not going to be that useful and in part because we won't take lots of risks you know we don't want to take a lot of risks with babies but with nine humans we have at the other 99.9999 a couple more nines percent of the species on this planet we have the ability to make mass changes in the biosphere we're doing it already we've been doing it for a long time the tools allow us to do it better um we are much less concerned about the risks of deformities or still births in cattle than we are in babies we're still less concerned about it in mosquitoes and we're not concerned about it at all in bacteria we are going to remake the biosphere very quickly using these tools and our regulatory mechanisms stink that's where I think we should be spending more attention um and less than this on us you know the biosphere is not just about us even though we like to think it is. Nathaniel I think that's my sermon for the end. Nathaniel? Um yeah first of all just thank you Hank for for that comment we didn't get at all into things like gene drives and environmental engineering which maybe it could be a topic for a future conversation like this um I guess um if I were going to make two if I had two quick closing points just to raise a couple of issues that we didn't get to very much in this conversation that I think really are important for um for the for everyone to consider who's thinking about genetic technologies. One is we've talked a lot about genetic engineering um and we also mentioned that briefly at the beginning of polygenic scores polygenic uh risk scores or polygenic indexes and I think genetic prediction is going to be just as important if not more important as far as having an impact on the everyday person's life um and genetic engineering and so and there are a lot of really foreigny hairy ethical issues tied up with predicting traits especially complex behavioral traits before they happen and you know the notion is well we could provide a better environment or we could you know do things that would mitigate any kind of uh condition whether it's you know mental retardation or schizophrenia or you know uh lower predicted school behavior. So I would just urge people to pay attention to things uh to these ideas of genetic prediction as they come out through um you know direct to consumer uh marketing and and so forth these are really important and tied with that uh we never really to talk today much about about race and I think there are some important racial issues tied up in um in a lot of these questions for example and some of them are hidden uh it's not that obvious for example the uh the the biobanks where the sequence is um the people are using to do the big genome wide association studies and calculate polygenic scores and and make all these predictions whether it's disease or behavior or intellectual you know capacity or whatever um it's still the case that the overwhelming majority of the sequence that's being used is uh it comes from people of European descent and so we have no idea what the effects are we you know what what such a score would mean to someone of Hispanic or or you know with immediate African ancestors or or Asian they have very very little data on this and so um that's I know some people who are trying to uh who are trying to address that and that's important and getting a more diverse um uh data set that more diverse data sets to work with but the flip side of that is that that can can reify those um by you know those supposed racial boundaries and uh and and make and make race racial differences seem more biological than they are so um so there's some complex and often hidden racial issues involved with this that I think are worth worth bearing in mind great anyone else? I would or I'm happy to say something too sure uh so I would say uh and I agree with everything that's been said I think a major issue is education need for public education uh about a lot of these issues and I think the point about race is extremely important one problem I know I'm at Columbia and we are one of the centers that are involved in the all of us project to try to uh do whole genome sequencing on a diverse group of people and it's been very hard to get people from certain ethnic and racial groups who've experienced terrible discrimination in the health care system to want to give their DNA to be studied uh and uh do we need to uh definitely have a more diverse uh set of people uh whose DNA we can examine to see what genes are quit them at risk of disease but at the same time we need to educate and work with these groups and I think that uh the scientific community has been trying I think can try harder but has not done a very good job I think there's a lot of understandable suspicion and weariness as I said given past abuses and discrimination I think that's something we need to work on uh Nathaniel's point about the genetic prediction uh here too I think uh I agree and I think at some point in the near future maybe 10 years from now when we all go to see our doctor our complete genome will be on in the medical record uh and doctors will be able to say you have genes associated with say increased risks of Alzheimer's disease and there are major questions that would not discuss but as suggested might be great for future discussion on do people want that information how will they understand that especially when again these are uh uh uh are not highly predictive genes in other words your risk of Alzheimer's may go up three times from say 5 percent to 15 percent depending on your age or 15 percent to 45 percent so these are partial numbers and we're not good at thinking about this or brains or did not evolve think about these kinds of complex numbers and lastly I would just say uh these are global phenomena and so the question of who's going to decide it may be researchers and patients in a country uh that is not one in which we are now sitting uh as mentioned earlier it was in China that the first uh uh uh CRISPR uh first use of CRISPR in human embryos occurred uh it was then decided okay you can do CRISPR on embryos but don't implant them into the womb and then in China again embryos were implanted into the womb so it may be in a country that is not one of ours uh where this moves forward I think that's important to be aware of and to try to think about ways to encourage as much cooperation with the kinds of guidelines that have come out and the kinds of ethical concerns that we've been talking about today. Mardee. Thank you Hank for inviting us to give sort of a concluding word um we talked about plants and animals and adults uh but I think where bio-effects is most concerned is in the area of reproduction right what's children these technologies allow us to have the the level of control that we can have over future children and my last thought is this we tend to think of having children as a profoundly personal choice uh we need in light of these technologies to be acutely aware of how our personal choices accumulate uh at a population level to create the society of the future and if all of our choices start excluding certain individuals in a way that as a society we have less tolerance for diversity and for differences I think we're paying a terrible price um you know as a species uh for allowing these decisions to occur in the privacy of you know people's uh you know own personal reflections without engaging with the societal implications so invite all of us to take this into account when we uh you know have these very very private conversations uh with ourselves with our partners with our family and friends um about what what it is that our personal decisions uh imply uh for the future of humanity. Great well I want to just tell everyone here I'll thrill them with how wonderful this conversation has been and how enlightening and I actually personally feel that to whatever degree there are and there must be open issues I think in many instances we outlined the sorts of issues that should be open for discussion uh politically uh with one's doctor with one's conscience and I think it's fascinating to reflect that so far from uh these sorts of technologies robbing us of uh human dignity um actually dialogues like this I actually think enhance when they're as as well thought out as these were today they really enhance our human dignity I think having the opportunity to have these conversations is uh it's incredible so I want to thank you all again and uh look forward to our audience coming back to see us uh for our next talk thank you everybody thank you thank you thank you fellow panelists it was fun great bye bye bye bye bye you