 Thanks for coming. We've got a good crowd tonight and we'd like to welcome you to the second annual heavy metal variety show. We're going to have a lot of fun tonight and we're especially glad to be here at the Helix Center and the New York Psychoanalytic Institute. Before we start I want to thank Ed who runs the Helix Center for putting this together and all the people involved, Sharon Weller and others who helped make all this happen. There was a lot of logistical details and Miguel and the sound crew because this is not obviously a sound room so we're very pleased with what they've been able to put together and we hope you'll enjoy the show. We're going to be doing some songs about mind and brain and mental disorders and talking a little bit about it. We want to start with a kind of big question. Who are you or what are you? Are you a body, a mind, a soul, all of the above, none of the above? Everybody has a different opinion about this but it's a pretty ancient question. The oracle of Delphi told Socrates, know thyself and you know this was a kind of deep thing because he also told Socrates he was the wisest man on earth. So some two millennia later, a fellow named Renee had a different idea. He said well dude I already know this stuff right? Not only do I know myself that's the only thing I can know. All I know is what's in my head. So with his famous Kajito Ergo Sum he became the godfather of consciousness. This of course is Renee Descartes and he's the grand poopov of consciousness and tonight we're going to celebrate Renee by starting out with a song in his honor. The first two songs will be about mind and brain and consciousness in particular and the first song is called Inside of Me and it's a direct tribute to Renee Descartes. Okay let's try it now. I think so I am. I feel so I must be. Sometimes I don't know. It used to be me. I see your eyes. They're staring at me. They're sharp as knives. What do they say? Inside of me. My soul has passion. It's trying to feel. Searching for desire. Nothing is real. My will is weak. Not very free. Nothing to get hung about. Well that's just the deal. It can't seem. It can't seem. Inside of me. Inside of me. That's the way. For me I can be. You can't see. Inside of me. Inside of me. That's the way. Oh me I can be. I can be. I think so I am. I feel so I must be. Sometimes I don't know. It used to be me. I think so I am. I feel so I must be. I sometimes I don't know. It used to be me. You can't see. Inside of me. Inside of me. That's the way. For me I can be. For me I can be. For me I can be. For me I can be. For me I can be. For me. All right thank you. So now we're going to move to another mind song, consciousness song. This one's about that eternal struggle between mind and matter specifically about that. And it's called Mind Over Matter. Mind Over Matter Something I'm trying to do I guess it's only physics It keeps me apart from you Mind Over Matter Something I'm trying to do Break down space and time We meet together with you I'm trying to wheel you here Find you wherever you are Locate your body your soul Pull you in from afar Are you still in my time? Have you slipped away? Have you gone? Have you gone? Well it's about living in another day We're aware of my journey Different path to another on the sea In the air, life free In the place, life free Wherever you are now Is my much fun No amount of space or time It keeps you from being alive Mind Over Matter Something I'm trying to do I guess it's only physics It keeps me apart from you Mind Over Matter Something I'm trying to do Break down space and time We meet together with you We meet together with you We meet together with you We meet together with you Thank you We've talked about consciousness We know it's important To think about consciousness You know your conscious mind Is in there and says to you Damn why did I say that? I've got to stick to it now It's too late to backtrack I've got to stick to that thing The thoughts are coming out It's all about the things that We've been sitting on in our brain The Oracle knew this But he needed to school Socrates Because Socrates didn't realize he was the wisest man on earth And so he said, you know, if you wanted it, they're the Oracle said, if you wanted to know the truth, just got to look inside And the Oracle said, hey, I didn't say it was going to be easy You got to get in there and dig deep to find out what's going on in there So, you know, this takes us to two songs about digging deep into the unconscious But before we do that, Tyler's going to do a short reading on something that is relevant Yes, so I told Joe I'd find something from... This is from the kathau panna shad And I just want to say a few words after I read it Thus develop, this is a advice to everybody, thus develop a super conscious Way of knowing Meditation enables you to go deeper and deeper into consciousness From the world of words to the world of thoughts Then beyond thoughts to wisdom in the self So what I take from that is that When you go beyond the stream, sort of typical stream of consciousness There can become a super consciousness because the stream of consciousness itself Is a certain unconscious aspect to it, we think it's conscious But in many ways when you start meditating you see that there's a lot of automaticity to the mind So that brings us to the song, the automatic mind This is a song by Tyler Welcome to the automatic mind Door is open to remember time Images are conjured like a dream Guiding actions on the waking screen Even though I realize that the light is so bright as I contemplate The automatic mind We live in the automatic mind In introspection opens in our eyes We seem advanced yet hardly in control Illusion of the will is comfort Even though I realize that the light is so light As I think about And can't live without the automatic mind Pop, blink, drink, think You think I'd love to vote. I love you. I love you. I love you. Even though I realize it's still I feel so blind As I think about it. And can't give me back. The automatic mind. All right. Tyler Volkam guitar. Daniela Schiller on backup vocals. Thank you. Mandathar from base. Jonathan Kanan on Saxon flute and Hamas Madaras on cello. Okay. Well, we can't talk about the unconscious without, of course, mentioning Sigmund, especially here in the New York psychoanalytic Institute. You know, when many of you probably know this, but when Freud visited the US, one of the main people that he visited with was Abraham Brill, who was one of Freud's American devotees and disciples, and one of the founders of the New York psychoanalytic Institute. So when here being in this room and thinking about the unconscious mind, you know, as a neuroscientist, I think of the unconscious in terms of how the brain works and especially in terms of memory. So, you know, you've probably heard that there are different kinds of memory. For example, there's explicit memory, which is memory you can consciously retrieve at will. It's in your brain. It's stored in a part of the brain called the hippocampus. You want to remember what you had for breakfast. You can reach down in there and out comes the memory. Or maybe, you know, remember a birthday. Hi, Christina. All the way in the back. So you can remember these conscious things, and Christina Alberini is about to come in as an expert on these kinds of memories. But you can dig in and pull this stuff out. What you do is you retrieve those memories from explicit memory and explicit long-term memory. Put them into something called working memory, which involves the prefrontal cortex. And I think that's really what Freud had in mind when he talked about the preconscious. Memories that were, you know, that are available to be retrieved but aren't being retrieved right now. But more interesting is the, you know, the true unconscious, the dynamic unconscious. How can we understand that in terms of the brain? Well, that's a more complicated thing. But, you know, a lot of what may be thought of as repressed memories may not quite be like that. So we know that, for example, certain kinds of very stressful situations will release certain hormones like glucocorticoids, and these will be released from the adrenal gland, go into the brain, go to our friend the hippocampus and shut it down. And that takes about an hour to do the full thing. So during that hour, you might have some memories that will be kind of fragmentally or incompletely formed and could still be in there, but you won't have the full-blown memory. So in a situation like that, under severe trauma, you might have an amnesia for the event, not because you necessarily repressed it, which may happen, but I'm not going to talk about that. But because of the effects of purely the mechanical effects of the stress hormones on the hippocampus, preventing it from forming a fully-blown memory. Now the patient may then go to therapy and try to retrieve those memories, and in the process, may be able to dig out those features and fragments and put together some kind of memory. And that may be enough, but on the other hand, that opens up the possibility of a lot of false memories. So we just have to be aware that there are situations where memories can be unavailable, things that were conscious at the time, but become unavailable because of these mechanical effects of stress hormones, and that can maybe account biologically for some of what has been called repression. That's not to say repression does not exist, I would not say that, but it's not something we understand from the point of view of the brain. So now we're going to do a little tune about another aspect of the unconscious. You know, you can't always trust what you think you know. You think you have something in your mind and you understand it, you're so sure about it, but then your mind deceives you. Things that are in our mind's eye aren't necessarily accurate. They're just in our mind's eye, which is the name of the next song. Take it away Tyler. If you look into my mind's eye, you would see the way that I cried. Deep inside in my mind's eye, we had love, it was good. You were there, you understood. Everything, yes everything. Here we go. You can't always trust what you think you know. You can't trust what you believe. Sometimes your mind just puts on the show, his silly disease. In my mind's eye you were mine, my mind's eye. If you look into my mind's eye, you would see the way that I cried. Deep inside in my mind's eye, you can't always trust what you think you know. You can't trust what you believe. Sometimes your mind just puts on the show, his silly disease. Deep inside in my mind's eye, you were mine, my mind's eye was blind, my mind's eye was blind, my mind's eye was blind, my mind's eye was blind. Okay, thank you. You know the Greeks had a dramatic device known as the Deus Ex Machina. This was a thing where the drama got at its worst where it seemed that the mortals couldn't figure out a god would descend from above and solve the problem. So a long time later a philosopher named Gilbert Ryle sort of rifed on this idea and talked about consciousness as the ghost in the machine. A bit later the cognitive science comes along and tries to understand the way the ghost, the machine underlying the ghost is working. And especially in the field of cognitive neuroscience we're trying to work out the way that machine does its thing. All right, now we're going to do one, another one about the mind and going deep inside. And this one is called Map of Your Mind. It's about how you know two people get together and you're trying to figure the other one out and look inside what's in the other's mind and try to find the way to work it all out and to be together. So this one's from our wife Nancy. All right. I've made a map of your mind. I've charted my course. Sailing deep inside. Got the heat of your heart. Keep me from the cold. Got the currents of will. Take me to your soul. I'm on a journey that I knew I'd made. It's a trip that I had to take. And excursion of need and design. So you're a source of art. You'll buy a fire. Made a map of your mind. I've charted my course. I've got the winds of horse. Got the heat of your heart. Keep me from the cold. Got the currents of will. Take me to your soul. I'm just loving that. My sails will be true. And they'll take me straight to you. Let the winds of strong but sweet. So when I land on my side, my homie. Got the heat of your heart. Keep me from the cold. Got the currents of will. Take me to your soul. Made a map of your mind. Take me to your soul. Made a map of your mind. Take me to your soul. To your soul. To your soul. To your soul. Okay, thank you very much. Okay, now we're going to do another one about memory. And this is about how hormones help sort of glue your memories together. It's called, in fact glue. I still have some crackling sounds there. Okay, Tyler? So here we go with glue. I saw you leaving. You saw me too. Smile at me. I saw you leaving. You saw me too. Smile at me. That's what you do. Tied to follow. But you are gone. Now you wait. Taking home alone. I can't think about your smile and eyes. I can't believe your words were lies. You make me happy. So very quiet. I can't forget those times we had. There must be something in my brain. There must be something in my veins. There must be some primal glue. That needs my other wrist, I got you. When I saw you go, I didn't know. But you'd be back in a week or so. It's so hard. Realizing that, I wasn't really where you're at. I dream about you, most every night. I dream you're back. Everything's alright. I keep my dreams so come true. I'll wake up right next to you. There must be something in my brain. There must be something in my veins. There must be some primal glue. That needs my other wrist, I got you. There must be something in my brain. There must be something in my brain. There must be something in my veins. There must be some primal glue. That needs my other wrist, I got you. That needs my other wrist, I got you. That needs my other wrist, I got you. Okay. And now we get to the part of the evening that Mark was talking about, the fear part. Fear is something that some of us are here were. John Moss. I just live in fear. The time works on the environment, that's a kind of fearful time. The first song we're going to do, Fear is called When the Night is Dark. When I was a kid, I used to really like vampire movies. The song was written about vampires, before vampires are really cool. I'm not like riding the bandwagon. Here we go, When the Night is Dark. When the night is dark, I lose my fear. When the night is dark, I never shed a tear. When the night is dark, I feel so free. When the night is dark, I feel so free. I feel the peace Then the day like that Scares me away Gives me away When the day like that Day like that Day like that Day like that When the night is dark Night is dark I come alive When the night is dark, night is dark I begin to thrive In the daylight sun, daylight sun Scares me away, wears me away When the daylight sun, daylight sun When the daylight sun, daylight sun Scares me away, wears me away When the daylight sun, daylight sun When the happy face Alright, thank you Thank you Alright, just in time, let's skip all the notes It's getting late, so we don't want to keep you too long So we drop one song at least and go on to a song that I wrote called Memory Pill This is moving into the topic, the last era general topic for the night, which is, is there a pill for that? I wrote a song called Memory Pill, which is about some work that some of us up here, Daniela's worked on, John's worked on it too, called a re-consolidation of memory Daniela's going to tell us a little bit about how that works No? No? No? No? Okay, that's that Alright, so... It's just Israeli accent No, no So, you remember how in 2004 there was this movie, Turnout Sanction of the Spotless Mind So that was such a great idea, you know, you want to get rid of a memory, you go to the doctor, zappigone So it turns out it was actually based on a true study that happened in Joe's lab in 2000 Joe's student, Karim Nader What he found is that, actually, you don't have to target the memory just as it formed You can actually target old memory, so whenever you reactivate a memory, it's unstable in your brain And this is a window of opportunity to block it So he did this experiment in red, and the red's going to remember the fear, and he gave them a drug, a pill Not a pill, actually, an injection, and the memory was gone So another question is, can you do it in humans? Can you remember something, get a pill? And your memory will be gone? Well, we don't know yet But that's what we think, how memory works There's a twist, though, we can use pills to erase memories when we want to get rid of them Especially when they're traumatic and bad But what we discovered in the last few years is that you can actually use this mechanism of reconciliation to update memories So whenever you retrieve a memory, it's actually changing and you incorporate new information available at the time of retrieval So really, you don't remember the original event, you just remember your last retrieval of it And with that, Tyler, take us away on memory bill We're in C, right? Yup, great We're in C, right? We're in C, right? We're in C, right? Oh, yes, oh, please, just give me a pill, wash away my memories Yeah, yeah Birth trauma and childhood stress, chicken pox, what a mess Baby sitters and nuns and priests to whom I confess Oh, girlfriends and algebra, playground bullies and achievement tests Yeah, I want to get rid of them, yeah Each Tyler, I remember, I'll take a pill Block that storage, make my memory nil, just give me a pill, whoa, yes, oh, please, just give me a pill, wash away my memories I want to get rid of them, yeah Took a stroll through my brain, oh what a cluttered place, my old neurons, low on synaptic space Stop in the hell that I need, that I need to erase, just give me a pill, oh, yes, oh, please, just give me a pill, wash away my memories, just give me a pill Oh, yes, oh, please, just give me a pill, wash away my memories Alright, memory nil Show the new song, okay, so we're gonna do two more songs One is called Brainstorm, and it's about something really bad happening in my life It's raining in my brain, I'm feeling okay Everybody thinks I'm insane, but I'm just on my game, I don't see the harm Just have a brain touch, walk the race and cause it's my magic's in the air Embers and flash, and legs are flashing, all I've again, don't have a cat Brain keeps coming out, thoughts are more profound, everybody's stand clear, hope I'll dissapear I'm not alone, it's just a brainstorm, heart to be, no more despair Muscles and grandmets are down, oh, I'm on a tear, oh, I'm on a tear Star's picking up steam There's a lot of times in the dream, there's tons of stand-in still I've got a chill, maybe that's just the norm When you're in a brainstorm, the foster is in, callers are flying, magic's in the air I'm not alone, I'm on a tear, feeling so free, not to be, no more despair Muscles and grandmets are down, I'm on a tear, I'm on a tear I'm on a tear, feeling so free, not to be, no more despair I'm on a tear, feeling so free, not to be, no more despair I'm on a tear, feeling so free, not to be, no more I'm on a tear, feeling so free, not to be, no more I'm on a tear, feeling so free, not to be, no more I'm on a tear, feeling so free, not to be, no more I'm on a tear, feeling so free, not to be, no more I'm on a tear, feeling so free, not to be, no more I'm on a tear, feeling so free, not to be, no more I'm on a tear, feeling so free, not to be, no more despair Muscles and grandmets are down, I'm on a tear, I'm on a tear Brainstorm! All right, we're gonna close it out with one last song This is called Fittingly the Mind Body Problem I've got a mind body problem, I don't know what to do I've got a problem, I don't know what to do My body wants you so, my mind's a no Is such an old love me, to me it'd be true Is such an old love me, to me it'd be true Oh now you're gone, I'm down and blue But now you're done, there won't be you again But now you're done, there won't be you again If I relent, I lose in the end I've got a mind body problem, he's got a problem, I don't know what to do He don't know what to do, I've got a problem, he's got a problem, I don't know what to do He don't know what to do, my body wants you so My mind's a no, no, no, no, no, no I even tried religion to get over you I even tried religion to get over you Well, holy dualism Couldn't solve my schism Now you've got the truth and the shaking He's got a problem, I'm craving you Don't know what to do, I'm craving you He's got a problem, oh I don't know what to do He don't know what to do, oh I'm feeling the pain I miss the sound Oh, I've got a problem I don't know what to do I've got a problem I don't know what to do My body wants you so I'm on so no Good night Manda Thorpe of Beeth, your yellow shiller The boss mother of his gun-cannon Tyler Vogue Thank you very much Joly-Doo Thank you very much