 Good afternoon everyone. Welcome to the Hilling Center for our May 1, 2021 roundtable. Today we have a very interesting group of folks that help us understand and talk a little bit about the concept of stress, which of course is in the air these days for various reasons that will be. We'll be going into a lot of that. So I think without no further ado, I'll start to introduce our panel today. And I'll I'm Jerry Hurwitz, I'm associate director of the helix center and a psychiatrist practicing psychiatrist in New York City. So first, Alison Avery is the vice president of inclusion and community at Dow Jones, a leading global diversity, equity and inclusion efforts. She has expertise as both a practitioner and strategist organizational culture, learning and development. She has held senior diversity, equity and inclusion and people team roles at Skaden Arps, Slate, Maker and Flom. NYU Langone Health and hospital systems and the NYU School of Medicine as the first director of diversity and inclusion. In advisory capacity, Alison was a principal consultant with work working mothers media, partnering with global 500 companies on cultural change strategies. There's much more to say without any interest in time. I'm going to move on to our next panelists, Ben Bernstein. Ben Bernstein is the psychologist, educator and author with an expertise on performance and test stress. And honors graduate of Bowdoin College, Bernstein received his doctorate in applied psychology from the University of Toronto and later a master's degree in music composition from Mills College. An educator for the last 50 years, Bernstein has taught at every level of educational system trained in London in the progressive British infant schools in the late 60s is received major grants from the American and Canadian governments for his work. Charles Marmer. Charles Marmer is Lucius N. Lautauer, professor and chair of the Department of Psychiatry at NYU Langone Health and is director of the NYU Langone Health for Precision Medicine in Alcohol and Use Disorder, Alcohol Use Disorder and PTSD. Dr Marmer's major research interest are post traumatic stress disorder, peri traumatic dissociation, peri traumatic distress, Vietnam veterans, police officers, Iraq and Afghanistan veterans, risk factors, MRI, MRS, FMRI, acoustic, startle, cortisol, HPA axis, catacolamine and so on and so forth. And lastly, Ralph Wharton. Ralph Wharton is professor of psychiatry at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons. His work is focused on the clinical use of psychotropic medicines alone and in conjunction with psychotherapy or psychoanalysis. His clinical research and the use of lithium carbonate in the effective psychosis was noted in the special sesquicentennial issue of the American Journal of Psychiatry and was republished there as one of its best in its one 150 years as a publication. He has published numerous other papers on diverse topics in psychiatry, including the use of methafinidate, electrical stimulation of the brain and phantom limb pain. Professor Wharton was honored as the president of the Society of Practitioners at the Columbia Medical Center and was Practition of the Year in 2010. He's a founding member of the International Society for the Study of Pain and has presented many papers on this subject. We are also going to have his co-moderator today, Beverly Zepisti, who many of you know is on the executive board of Helix Center and is also a practicing young youngian psychiatrist, psychoanalyst, sorry. So, here we go. Dr. Wharton, would you care to introduce the topic for us and we'll get things going? You have to unmute. Okay. It's a pleasure to be here and Beverly's done a wonderful job in organizing this panel of experience, people, veterans of all kinds of stresses themselves. I'll give a little brief history about the use of the term. We can start with Walter Cannon, who in the late 30s determined some studies about home use basis about how the body regulates itself, and then go on to Hans Celia, who published the first books using the term stress and having done his work in Canada, he determined that the term was lower stress because we're only male doctors in doing these studies at that time. So, lower stress has been adopted around the world. Stress has a variety of meanings in every culture. And looking up some of the definition that was even in China, the word stress is used, but the symbol also is crisis. So we can say stress is a crisis in one level of another. But he was interested in how people adapted to stress. One of the landmark studies was done by Philip Hench, who was a professor of medicine at the Mayo Clinic, who noted that pregnant women who had arthritis had their arthritis improved. And he studied and discovered that during the stress of pregnancy, when arthritis improved, the adrenal glands turned out more cortisone. And that won him, along with Thorne and Kendall, the Nobel Prize in understanding the internal response to bodily stress of all kinds. But the first stress was that of pregnancy. Also, other stress studies were done by a fellow named Norbert Wiener, who was one of the beginners of use of computers. And he determined and studied people who had chronic stress, which is different than acute stress, which results as a result of having TB. So he did some studies. Most importantly, thereafter, the doctor, who was the physician for all of the American Navy, developed what he called the SRS scale, which was the social readjustment rating scales. And what he did was, in the Navy, if you would get promoted, you started out with the PT to go to a battleship, a destroyer, a battleship aircraft carrier submarine. And even though you were getting promoted, the advancement in pay and status, every family was stressed by promotion. And his scale goes on. Now, today, in fact, in the 1980s, just to give another update a little bit, Time magazine published an article with a picture of a doctor in front saying that was the era of stress. The 80s was the year of stress. Of course, there are other people like Paul Ekman, who dealt with facial expressions of stress. And then Stephen J. Gould wrote a book called A Wonderful Life as if we were stress-free, which we're obviously not, and even Stephen Pinker, another who wrote a book about our better angels that we could live with stress and go off to Heaven. The most important thing, I think, in terms of studies that I've done and Charlie Marmer has done is about how the adrenal gland helps us adapt to stress. And on a hormonal basis, it's simple to talk about buco-cordicoids, which is the body's response to stress. But nevertheless, the use of the term is dependent on who's using it, whether it's a psychologist, a psychoanalyst, a surgeon, we all use stress kind of loosely. And the problem for today is the stress, obviously, of the pandemic. I don't think it was anybody who isn't aware of that stress and the stress of isolation, in addition to the fear of illness. So in terms of the demand for work on this subject, everybody in this panel has a point of view. My experience, as you've alluded to in the introduction, Jerry, was in patient care at a hospital, and in hospital stress, if you're having an amputation, or if you're having a heart transplant, the stresses are unique and indescribably highly individualized. So it's hard to have a field theory of stress. And the other question would be, even in terms of, I'll ask for you about the cold pressure test. There are people in New York who go into the water and cold water, and presumably, and there's some latest theory that cold exposure can perhaps immunize you distress. So people who are acutely going to cold water seem to have a lesser stress response. On the other hand, if you're an Eskimo, and you move from Alaska to California, you lose that, you deal with the stresses in California. So, that would be my introductory comments. Thank you. And one of the things that appealed to me with this topic was how stress really traverses such a huge sort of vertical column of scientific and sociological issues. And how do we deal with it and how it's different from just a challenge? It was really Ralph's organization, the Nathaniel Wharton Fund webinar that simulated the idea and desire to have this program unstressed. So Ralph, your group is doing just wonderful work of study on it. And one of the features of the pandemic era, I think, is that it is real and also the Black Lives Matter movement is that it's really shown that we have not only individual stresses but group stresses. And so I'm hoping that if you get a little bit into that, what is the individual's experience of stress and what is it some identity issue or group issue that stimulates stress as well. I'm happy to jump into the discussion. Thank you, Ed and Jerry, and the panel for inviting me and Ralph for your scholarly historical review. I thought maybe Ralph, I would just jump on at the end of that review and talk about just briefly some very contemporary ideas of stress. The first thing to say is that as someone who's spent my life studying survivors of catastrophic stress, that we have to sharply differentiate between stress or and stress response. This problem was first addressed in mechanical engineering before it was in human psychology. So to take the example of a bridge, a very strong bridge built according to the most advanced structural principles can withstand enormous repeated stressors and maintain structural integrity. A structure like a bridge which is weakened may be taken down by relatively minor stresses that the same is true in the balance between stress and coping in humans and animals that there's a balance between stress or stress response vulnerability and resilience. So it's a very, very complicated area. So we have to differentiate between the stress or and the stress response. Second, in humans in human psychology and psychiatry, we now consider two broad classes of stressors, maybe three, one normal stresses of everyday life that lead to adaptive responses and growth. Second, stressful life events Ralph which you briefly alluded to but include promotions, emotions, life transitions, marriages, divorces, losses, economic fortunes made and lost, changes in homes where we live. These are captured and stressful life measures. And we know in general if people are exposed to too many of these otherwise somewhat normative stressful life events that they're more prone to physical illness and to psychiatric problems of stress, anxiety and depression. And so people have a prolonged abnormal reaction to one of these more everyday life stressors, we call it an adjustment disorder either predominantly anxious reaction or predominantly a dislimic depressive reaction. And so we know that in the last couple of weeks, we have a lot of people who are catastrophic stressors such as sudden death of a family member sexual assault, the most extreme aspects of structural racism, and so on and these lead can lead in some vulnerable people to acute and chronic post traumatic stress disorder. So there are three very broad dimensions of stress. And most stress stress related to everyday life experiences which and changes and catastrophic stressors, any of these can be single or repeated. The final thing is a couple of the ideas of Bruce McKewen, who is one of the most important barriers to the psychobiology of stracy, Bruce unfortunately recently passed away but was a highly distinguished professor at Rockefeller University and a friend. And Bruce has contributed many things to the stress literature, a few of his ideas which I think are very important. Bruce asked the question, which is the organ, the human organ of stress response, and his conclusion was while the entire body responds to stress, as you mentioned Jerry beginning at the cellular level, all the way up to the society level, Bruce started the brain as the primary organ of stress for three reasons. First, the brain interprets the significance and relative threat of stressful experience, and stressors only become unmanageable and pathologic when they're perceived to be threatening and vulnerable. So the first thing is the brain gets to say whether this stressful experience is dangerous or not. If a danger signal is registered cognitively, the brain second mobilizes multiple body defense systems and the distribution of blood flow changes immune functioning to protect you if you bleed changes endocrine functioning to protect you if you're infected, changes the immune system and many other changes. The brain interprets the stress. Second, it directs the neuroendocrine, neuroemunological, and other systems that are mobilized to try to allow for a successful adaptation to stress. The third reason McEwen said that the brain is the primary organ of stress is that the brain itself is profoundly changed by repetitive unmanageable stress. The brain is remodeled neuroanatomically in terms of neuro connectivity, and in terms of neurotransmitters, and when stress is unremitten and unmanageable, it predisposes to a variety of conditions, especially chronic depression. So the final idea of McEwen, which I found particularly interesting, and Bruce devoted a great deal of his professional life to this idea, is that we are all as the human is a very rugged organism and designed to tolerate stress so that when stress occurs, there's a response he called an alloplastic response, meaning an adaptive biological psychological and cognitive response to stress to adapt to it. McEwen's view of this however was, there's a cost to be paid for allostasis, and with each adjustment we make to a stressor, there is a metabolic and psychological cost, and if there are too many of these, the system breaks down. And that leads to an allostatic driven collapse in the functioning of the organism. So I think Ralph, just to kind of take your story to the current laboratory level, those are some of the clinical and neurobiological aspects of stress. One last observation from our work and others on traumatic stress, although it is normal to have a robust cortisol glucocorticoid response to an acute stressor, and that's a healthy response among individuals who fail to mount an adequate cortisol response to stress, as in measured in their plasma or urine, or saliva or other cortisol measures, they are very prone to getting to psychiatric difficulty. If they can't effectively mount an adequate cortisol response to stress, they end up having run away adrenaline reactions and are prone to post traumatic stress. So I'll leave it at that point. Thanks, I would love to jump in here. We together, but Ralph talked about what Charlie talked about, particularly starting with the difference between the stress or in the stress response. So a lot of people I deal with are test takers from board surgeons who have to take from your surgeons who have to take a national board exam to high school students have to take the SAT. And invariably people come to me and they say, Dr be stress a test stress me out. I show them a piece of paper like this. And I say, me to say that this piece of paper with these four letters on it are actually like jumping up the table and choking you. And then they laugh. And what I'm pointing out to them is the test is a piece of paper with print on it. It is not doing anything. So what then we do is we look at what their stress responses. And one of the things that I've seen, and I think this is really pertinent to what we're talking about on a very basic level, is that watching coming much thousands of people take tests. One of the first things that they do when they open the test booklet and they start to read the first item is that they gas. And they start holding their breath. So the signals, as you all know that the brain is getting is that there's something really dire going on here and they continue doing that for three hours, which is one reason why people are so exhausted. So that stress response builds. The exam gets harder. They have more difficulty dealing with it. You know, I've trained people, I've trained high school kids to raise their SAT scores 200 points by regularizing their breath with the course of the test. So the point about this is that the stress response is where, you know, I put all of my energy is training people how to, what I call stay connected, because my sense is that when people are faced with a stress or one of the things that that engenders a bigger and bigger stress responses the way that they they disconnect, either in the body, they freeze, or in the mind or in the mind, they get completely distracted. They can't stay on task. So, you know, putting all this together. I'm a long term student of all the Eastern Arts and Meditation, particularly the Vedic scriptures. And there it's all about being in the present, staying in the present. How do we get back to the present? I'm going to talk to an audience and I talk about the breath. I see people roll their eyes like, oh, he's going to talk about breathing. Oh my God, you know, I've heard all about breathing. Right. I gave it a talk at NYU. One of the students came up to me in the break and it's like, really, I raped him. I've done the breathing thing. You'd be dead and we're all doing the breathing thing. But these basic skills of responding to stress life is stressful. It's just filled with tests, big test, little tests. The whole world is involved with one. My wife and I are supposed to leave for India in two weeks. You know, US government has just clamped that down. We have friends there who have friends who are family that are dying in droves now. It's how we respond to these situations that really is what I feel what we really need to educate people about. How to respond. Much better than learning about tangents and quadratic equations and things like that, which can all be helpful. But life skills are really where it's at. And I think this combination just wanted to show one other thing quickly. And I'm going to, I asked if I could just show one slide here because I think this also helps. Let's see, here it is. So Ralph mentioned a lot about history in the early part of the 20th century, two psychologists named Jurkeys and Dodson studied how stress affects performance, except they talked about it as a arousal. And they can't really use the word arousal the same way they did because it's now conflated with a lot of other life experiences. But this is so helpful and I show this to everyone that I work with. And they found it's a bell curve too little stress. Performance goes down too much stress performance goes down. And then there's just the right amount of stress, which is per individual, by the way, and everybody's optimal level is different, where you actually are at an optimal level of performance. And this is not about what's happening to you. It's about how you're responding to stress response to the situation. And when you can keep your stress level at a more optimal level, you get inspired creative work and you can really work much better with others. So I thought this is also an important thing. Athletes call that the zone. When athletes talk about it, they talk about it like, oh, man, I get into the zone as if it's magical or mystical, something. It's not. It's actually a state of consciousness, which you can affect by being trained and training yourself to become aware when you're stress responses building, and then to use specific tools to get you back. So I hope that that adds to the conversation. Allison, thanks Beverly. I think it was time for me to jump in as well. So thanks. Hello everyone. Glad to be here as well. And one of the things that was not mentioned in my introduction that I will just illuminate is how I know about release of risky and the way is that I both have a hat in working in organizations, as well as corporations really looking at diversity, equity and inclusion, as well as culminating the my psychoanalytic training as a union psychoanalyst. So I had a private practice as a psychoanalyst for nine and a half years and I'm finishing the arc of that. So I'm always very interested in, as we spoke about the the intro psychic all the way up to the organizational level, given both fields of work that I have done and so stress is something that, obviously, as we talked about, it exists. The framing of the intro cellular level all the way up to the global level and everywhere in between. And so in my work, I really am looking at the dimension as it relates into psychically, but the bulk recently in my organizational roles has been on an individual interpersonal team as well as department and org level and looking at how primarily stress scores disproportionately impact different communities and affinity groups and and we know that in the United States women report higher rates of stress in their lives than men mothers report higher rates than fathers, people of color report higher rates of stress than white people. These are all due to factors like stress of racism discrimination and all the isms that we can kind of list as well as historical and the students of inequity. And so in April, the CDC actually came out and it claimed racism a serious public health threat. And that speaks to something that Charles was mentioning related to the catastrophic dimensions is that a lot of stress can be mitigated through condition setting. And so how do we take seriously what are some of these elements from research in creating conditions that ameliorate and mitigate certain stressors that actually are disproportionately experienced by varying communities. And that's something that I'm really interested in because that manifests very clearly in the workplace. So how do these social stress situations of the disproportionate impact of COVID on communities of color, the disproportionate impact of stress and discrimination, as well as witnessing a violence and secondary trauma and the impact of stress caused by poverty. How does that disproportionately impact communities and all of that gets brought into the workplace which undermines people's ability to drive to impact to perform at their highest level. So how do we set different types of conditions in order to address and redress that is something that is a big arc and focus of my work. And so when looking at one of the great benefits of having the research that everyone has gone through as well as the CDC coming out and articulating the severe inequality that is engendered through racism but also noting that racism is considered as serious public health threat that directly affects the well being of millions of Americans. And so it directly affects the health of the entire nation is that it creates a level and degree of seriousness, which I have seen change over the course of the past year. And that's been something from from stress being thought about as a general well being to also social stress and how it exists on levels to be taken at a different degree of seriousness within the workplace and corporations that I have fourth with. And what I mean by that is putting in things in place like social support systems for employees actually giving days off to its to participate in protests that's something a lot of corporations did taking day offs in order to mourn police killings for communities of color who were disproportionately impacted or felt as though that was a secondary trauma and needed time in order to mourn. That was something a lot of institutions and organizations were creating also different celebratory events to highlight and lift up the difference of impact so there's kind of the global impact of COVID at large but how do we talk about the context and the specificity felt by different affinity groups and populations and hold and balance the both particular as well as the overarching context is something that a lot of organizations have been doing that has really led to a different experience of employee well being and and and holding a lot of sessions dealing specifically with social stress addressing that social stress as a result of discrimination or structural racism and having handed conversations is something that I have not seen in my tenure with a diversity equity inclusion work for the past 15 years in such a way that the seriousness of both stress and stressors and the seriousness of employee well being is at a different level that is actually changing policy practice engagement and corporate structure so that's something that I'm bringing from my kind of organization and structure level of the value that I think we're at and being able to take racism conditions around stress and the actual existence and reality of stress as something serious that we might need to be proactive and set conditions for so so that's something that I'm I'm been thrilled about the impetus with regard to that but also that is something new that I've seen emerge as a result of COVID and as a result of consciousness around structural racism that has allowed for a difference in setting conditions more intentionally. I'd like to mention one individual stress or a man who survived stress in the military. I met a congressional Medal of Honor winner. A man was about five foot three maybe weighed 130 pounds and I very much wanted to meet him since it was unique in my military and meet this fellow and I asked him about winning the congressional Medal of Honor. He was a sergeant at the time. He unwittingly led a group of men about 50 or 60 men into an ambush. And the ambush was in Korea and they were being raped by a machine gun, three people running a machine gun swinging it back and forth all the men are on the ground. In the midst of this situation, three men managing the gun. This guy stands up rushes ahead and kills three people with a shop. And I looked at this guy and I could not believe that way that you acted in this way under stress to save his men and want a congressional Medal of Honor. The second kind of stress that I would mention was man named Shellingberger who landed the airplane in the Hudson River saved all those lives. Everybody did the right thing. And he did exactly the right thing and had a post traumatic stress response. He did find relative to the AMA. He did the right thing on automatic part. The way that presumably this guy did who killed three people won't call that automatic. But anyway, he saved all those lives. But afterwards, he had a tremendous stress when you realize how he reacted. On the other hand, in Korea, a lot of soldiers ever fired their guns. They found them dead. So some soldiers did something heroic or heroic and other people ran away. So that's part of the fight or flight. But the most important thing I would mention as the last is the studies we're doing now some research about women during pregnancy being stressed. And where do some studies on EEGs and FMRIs and newborns up to two years old. And the question is when the mother is stressed during pregnancy, how much of her stress gets through the placenta? How does it affect cortical development and whether some people, if the mother has been starving as many mothers did in the Netherlands or the Nazis were invading, they didn't eat properly. And so they had a lot of children who were very vulnerable. They had most mothers, inspired the stress they were under, managed to develop a newborn. But we don't know when we're trying to figure out how stress might be transmitted through the placenta. We know the blood goes through some neurological thing. But neurologically, we don't know. So we're doing some studies on it. Some people have built in resilience or built in fight or flight. The third thing, as mentioned, is free. Some people fight flight or freeze. So these reactions are so diverse. And these are individual social situations, not the group thing that Allison is talking about, which is a different realm of experience. I think that's incredible, Ralph. Both of your vignettes really resonate with my lifelong experience. First on the military side, I also have the experience of for many years consulting with NASA and the Russian Space Administration. And as you can imagine, they have very specialized training techniques to try to train the astronauts and cosmonauts to be able to tolerate enormous sudden stress and maintain cognitive control. The most famous, of course, is the Apollo 13 mission in which Swagard was quoted to have saying, Houston, we have a problem, which was not an exact quote. The problem was that in about 90 seconds, his crew was going to be incinerated into molecules because of an error in the reentry trajectory. And they were remarkably able to maintain cognitive control in the face of imminent catastrophic death and make an immersive move that speaks to their selection and training. So that's very, very interesting to study to study super stress resilient groups like Navy SEALs, astronauts, and cosmonauts and try to learn from them how we can all cope with stress better. Second, I'm very interested in the work you're doing, Ralph, with pregnant mothers and would like to contact you after this program, because we're starting a similar project at NYU would love to collaborate with you. But Allison to come to one of the issues when we looked with Fritz Francois and others at NYU at areas where we can make a difference in structural racism and medicine. And so we decided in psychiatry that probably the most profound point of entry to act against structural racism, even more profound than making accessible and pathic care available to all people, including all groups of color is actually conditions of pregnancy. Because of we know enough from animal models and some human studies in the work you're beginning to do, Ralph, that stress during, particularly during the second and third trimester of pregnancy is profoundly dangerous to the developing to the mother, of course. And we know that, for example, black young mothers have multiple times, the rates of death and morbidity and mortality related to pregnancy nationally and even higher in the New York City area. So of course, adverse conditions during pregnancy are huge risk factors for maternal mortality and morbidity, but something that has not been studied yet well enough and Ralph I'm delighted to hear that your group is beginning this is to look at the impact on the developing fetal brain, particularly during the second and third trimester of pregnancy of severe high levels of stress, as well as other problems such as nutritional deficiencies exposure to bad air, bad water, bad food and other conditions. Because the data currently suggests that the origins of most very serious psychiatric illnesses, particularly schizophrenia and autism, probably have their origins at the time the brain is organizing itself during the second and third trimester of pregnancy, not during teenage years, which has been considered to be the proderome for psychosis, but backing all the way up to pregnancy and that high levels of stress which are pro inflammatory may disorganize neurocircuitary and molecular organization and favor towards the development of the lifelong risk of psychosis. So if we, from my perspective, Ralph, if we were to change one thing in medicine and especially in consultation, these on medicine and psychiatry, it would be to focus on conditions of pregnancies and bring health equity to all young mothers, because their lives are at stake and their children's entire development's stake. I wanted to jump in and go back and tie an end to this topic about pregnancy. One of the nice things about touching at a topic is it's something that about half the population might have, or almost half the population might have experience with. It's interesting, the stories of heroism we just heard, and I love hearing those stories, I always have, you know, they are sort of, I don't know what you say, they're heartwarming, they're inspiring, but of course, it's interesting that they also push us away from the people and the experiences where stress overwhelmed the person, let's say, and they do not have such a heroic outcome, right. And I think, I wonder if that has a negative impact socially in that when people don't want to think about a horrible experience. Let's say being in the hospital, racism being the victim of racism, they don't want to think about those things, but they don't want to put themselves in the place of those people who are experiencing those things, that makes them feel nervous. They go to these stories of heroism, you know, and there's this a little bit of a tendency to say, oh come on, buck up, you could deal with it. Why, you know, I know this story about this guy just something great, and I love the stories and I think they're important, and we can learn a lot just as Charles was saying, we can learn a lot about those people who do heroic things when they're under pressure. But I'm curious about that, the way stories of heroism move us away from empathizing with, you know, things of the moment. One last thing, just to try to keep it brief, but Ralph's common about the hospital at the very outset about how people are stressed during the hospital. A lot of folks who have not been in a hospital don't know what that's like, and it is real, and you could just go in for a minor thing, it doesn't have to be an amputation. Yes, if amputation is highly stressful, but a lot of folks the moment they're in the hospital, they are stressed in the gills, it could be for the removal of a cyst, you know, or something like that. And, but a lot of folks don't experience that unless they've had it, unless they know someone has gone through it or they've gone through it themselves. I think the same thing applies to racism. I mean, being a victim of racism, I think people don't really put themselves in the, in the position, empathize with those folks, they don't get how much. Yeah, not only does it suck, it's terrible, but it's stressful, and it could hurt your health. And I think that's why the CDC's new policy and that is so important. So I was interested in that sort of heroism and empathy sort of angle of things. Well, the best reason case, since you mentioned Jerry, is this young woman, a teenager who was witnessing the death of Floyd. She will suffer the law. Now that's vicarious suffering. So she was stressed because of what she didn't do. And that will live with her for a long time. I was mostly empathic, of course, with Mr. Floyd, but with that teenager who witnessed it and made the whole case work, she will suffer for a lot. I worry about that teenage kid who took the movie. And so vicarious suffering is another dimension of stress. So, and I had a patient who was having an amputation. And the spouse was more upset than the patient. So vicarious suffering is another dimension of our humanity. And it is a tremendous problem with these racial issues that we see. And a lot of people. And also witnessing murder. So not just the guilt, but also witnessing murder is in and of itself. Yeah, just wanted to make sure that. So that that will live with that child for a long time. I was mostly certain as much concerned about the whole situation, but that child will live with that memory. And either have on the other nations. So I just want to say something briefly about the question. So it was the public health threat. So that's what the CDC says is racist and being one of the most salient public health threats. So the idea of heroism and condition or context and does that deflect from some aspects. And what came to mind firstly with that idea is also who we cite in an heroism way and who we reference as engaging in a heroic act. And I think that also changes and creates a different and Catholic spectrum of the way that we think of heroes. And so I think that it's a great point of the examples we gave. But there's also examples of heroism as it relates to specific context that Ralph was just talking about. And then those examples of thinking about different contexts of heroism based on what the stressors are, the situations, the social determinants are, I think is critical. But I think there's been an over in that or can be an over indexing that we see through a lot of research around a singular representation of what heroic acts look like, who they're done by. And how we then align to that in our concept of what the heroic is and means. And I think that so I think that it's a good question about does that matter the heroic versus the empathic. But I think it also really deeply matters who we tee up and what types of examples and stories we are giving about the heroic as well. And so, you know, with that, like I think of the different pressures and stressors that someone like Stacey Abrams has in death threats, you know, that endured in being a public figure. And her reaction to me was a heroic pivot from a loss of an election to really sustained effort around a singular goal. And it was a Herculean lift that then had a great outcome. But I saw that as an example of a heroic move based on the social press or history, structural dimensions and barriers and challenges, as well as active threats of violence that she endured given her role. And what she's been able to do with it and translate into. So, so I think we need to be conscientious around those because that actually helps me in creating the variation of how we define and who we think of as heroic also changes our empathic ability to connect to different people, folks and stories in understanding what different pressures look like, the context of different social stressors, what people have had to overcome in a particular way that we can identify with as well as deem heroic. And I think that's just going to put that subjectivity out there to how we even define heroism. And I think one of the other stories, an opening about attitudes about stress, we did a study on the Sherpas who carry these loads up the mountains and we did some testing because we were stunned at least I was stunned to see what they could do in the cold and bearing these loads and we had a little testing machine, not like a written test but this was a test of heat and cold sensitivity, which my colleague brought actually to the Himalayas to test the Sherpas. And their tolerance for pain was extraordinary, both with heat and cold. And we asked them, you know, well, do you feel anything? Well, that's life. There was acceptance of the stress and interpretation of the stress that you think socially or a test exam. And so, as Charlie was mentioning before the social context becomes extremely important, and that's life, pain and the stoicism was remarkable. Some people are asking, it reminds me, you guys are going to ask Ben what he thinks about this. I mean, it's been my observation that sort of test taking in the college prep, that whole, you know, that whole domain has progressed in a way where I think a lot of students don't they sort of expect to be stressed. They go into these situations thinking this is going to be a stressful situation. Yeah, and absolutely, but I think it's the history of it goes to things that we're talking about regarding acts of heroism and models and it just makes me think about the competitive nature of our culture, how deeply competitive everything is and how one has to rise to the top and how there is a top and how you have to. And it just so it starts at a very early age. I mean, a kid once who was going to middle school had to be interviewed for the middle school and had to pass a bad test and she wouldn't speak. And so they brought the parents brought the kid to me and she wouldn't speak and she couldn't she wouldn't do math. And, you know, through just having heard of some drawings and releasing all the pressure around around the brother, by the way, who was trying to get into an Eastern prep school. And his father, the way he trained him for the interview was to stand behind doorways and when the kid passed through the doorway, the father would jump out and ask him a question. So the poor. So this little girl, I just gave her some crayons and she would like to draw and she would not let into telling me stories about this dinosaur family and the brother and the mother and father. And then it all led to her being just telling me that she was afraid to ask a question. She was afraid to say she didn't understand something. So, you know, the pressure builds up so early on. This is a kid in what fifth grade, she was afraid she couldn't speak up and say, I don't understand. And I had a coach, the teacher, the parents, everybody involved with this kid to encourage her just to say, I don't understand. So I'm, I'm a team and they're like, I want to have a hair salon. I want to do this and I want to do that. And they weren't interested in the work that I was doing related to testing. They just wanted to make money. And when we got into the work, I said, well, we're going to, I'm going to train you in the stuff. They're, they start to really light up. In other words, we got, we went deeper into who they are and what they're interested in and getting away from all this competition. So, you know, by the time people get to high school, one of the things that they say is when they're having a problem with tests is they say, I'm not a good test taker. That's a very unfortunate label to pin on yourself. Right. Because life is filled with tests daily, daily. I'm not a good test taker. And I think that I just want to come back to something I said earlier as related to what we're all talking about, which is that I think how we address training students, all these that are educating students into life. And so, you know, life is so much more important than a lot of the subjects that the way you're on them, which they're bored to tears with. And, you know, don't get engaged with and then they just end up feeling stressed because there's no real connection that they have. So, yeah, it is a big problem. And I've just seen kids drop off the map, particularly in our neighborhood, you know, they drop out of high school. They just lose it. They're not interested. You know, I think we're losing. I think we're losing a significant proportion of national treasure in all these kids. Nobody knows what they could really turn into. You know, what's inside of them that really wants to be cultivated wants to grow, just because they didn't have the same conditions I had. That's no reason that they shouldn't be able to flourish. But the stress of performing the stress of being on top the stress of in some way being a hero is is concerned. I just want to say something else about that because it has another connotation. The sports stars can be very wonderful models for kids, you know, NBA stars and football stars and both both genders. Because these are people who have really worked to achieve something and they can see that they have a dream and they really work for it. They can achieve it. So that way handling the stress of having to perform is a different story because you're building something from the inside. I think that's really what I'm trying to get to here to build from the inside the sense of resilience, this sense of possibility. Charlie is bringing up about the Apollo astronauts. Those guys are trained to stay very present into every single moment that they have to deal with. Boom, boom, boom. They are not flipping to the past. They're not going into the future. They are present. And that's really the key, I think, in all of this. That's the great equalizer for all of us is that we're all in the present hand and as related to what Allison's been talking about, we're all in this together. So let's get it. I mean, last point about this, we just spent a lot of time in India. In fact, we're going to be moving there in about a year. And one of the people that I study with there puts it very simply. He says, you're even living in an eye world or a we world. Well, we're all living in a we world. And the people who think we're living in an eye world are really stressing the rest of us out. We just had a president for four years. It's a perfect example of that. Yeah. And then would you think and this goes back also to what Allison said and what everyone has been saying that the girl who took the photo, the video Ralph. She was so present in the moment and she had the presence to do what needed to be done. And she is heroic. Will that help her balance out the feeling of trauma of what she saw? So then you see. Well, I was shaking her vigorously and I'd like to hear what she has to say about this, but she, I don't know. I mean, I know her from the media, but if she should be absolutely lauded. If that's the right word for her act, what she did that she was present that she stood there that she took it in. And what whatever help she's getting. I mean, it makes me want to now find out what kind of help was been offered to her to deal with the trauma because as Allison said, she watched a death in the making. So, yeah, I mean, I think your point is great, but I believe that that should be that should be highlighted in some way. And what help her in terms of somewhat giving her another side of her own. Oh, totally. Yeah, I think so. I think that she, you know, rewarding presence as a way of living as a way of contributing as way of being connected. Sure, I would think that could that could help her considerably. Allison, I was wondering what you were thinking about this. Well, yes, I would think she would be getting a lot of social and emotional support. The Vaccagit Chief Health guilty fear that she didn't do more, but she was helpless to do more. And that's one of the struggles of many women who are not assertive. But fortunately, we have Merkal and other women who have outspoken in the heroic way. So I didn't mean to, to cavalier about ignoring the courage of women, including Rosa Parks or whatever. So I think there are enough heroes to go around, not to intimidate people, but to set examples of possibility when they're feeling more vulnerable. And whether there was a person who had a special foundation to present heroic acts to high school students and went around talking to give the models of heroic women and men. There's a special foundation that did this when I had high schools talking about heroes of the past of both genders. And I think that's the thing. Potentially will help people develop courage and resilience and imagination. That's the one thing I was going to quickly say in response to Ben when he mentioned the NASA pilots is that, you know, what is important is I think this may also apply to some instances in the military, but I know it applies to the NASA people. They put a value on that presence of mine. That's part of their culture. This young woman who did have a presence of mine, she was a victim of it in the sense because she stumbled upon this crime that was going on. So within her case, we have to read, and I am in favor of this retro, respectively, saying, look what a hero you were. And that may ameliorate some of the stress she feels afterwards some of the symptomatology she may be exposed to if you say, wow, you're a hero, doesn't guarantee she won't. I mean, Ralph, you mentioned Sully, who, you know, was part of the pilot and he knows he's supposed to have a presence of mine and he did incredibly well, and yet he still has some PTSD symptoms. So I think having a culture that values that presence of mine really is helpful and also retrospectively giving awards and saying, wow, that was amazing. That also helps, but it doesn't completely prevent, let's say, a stress response. If it did, we wouldn't really have so much PTSD in some of the soldiers and people who are heroes at war. But one thing that Charles said and has been in discussion, I just want to ask something about. And he said that stress has to do with the brain. What I wanted to ask, and I could ask this question in many ways, the simplest way is to say, what's the connection between stress and awareness of stress. Why is it there are stresses that we can go experience but not be aware of. Sometimes the patients where you see that what they are going through is stressful. You ask them and they say, oh no, I don't find this stressful. And then it takes work to get them to understand that it's stressful. And as I think one aspect of that is that some people under high stress are prone to dissociation. And when they dissociate, they disconnect mentally, emotionally and physically from the experience, and they don't register it in the normal way in consciousness. So it takes a lot of work to help them to break through the dissociation, connect with the experience, engage with it emotionally, and deal with the memory traces, which are actually there. So dissociation is a very important thing. We found if you had to predict one measure one thing after severely extreme stressful life experience that predicts whether someone will go on to develop a pathological stress reaction. It's peritromatic dissociation. They disconnect. They depersonalize. They realize they take distance from it. They tell you, oh, I ran out of the World Trade Center and my best friend was just killed. And I thought I was going to die, but I'm not too upset doctor because I thought I was in a movie. It didn't feel real to me. It took some time to help that person connect. So dissociation is very important. I wanted to also get back to something that Alison was saying about heroes. And I love your example of Stacey Abrams. She's really heroic in very much the same way that the male heroes were talking about her rope. We could take Michelle Obama. We could take other incredible figures that are heroic. One of the difficult things if we're going to be, if we're going to have honest and difficult conversations about this. So we have to ask the question, what do these heroic figures have in common and what opportunities to some other people not have one thing they have in common. We found in our research is high education and high academic achievement. Stacey Abrams has multiple degrees, including a law degree from Yale. Michelle Obama has a law degree, I think from Harvard. The astronauts and cosmonauts are and Navy seals are selected because they have masters and doctoral degrees and aeronautical engineering. And by and large, they've come from relatively stable family backgrounds with educated parents, affectionate stable attachment figures in early childhood, an enormous encouragement to become high achievers, and they've learned to control their emotions in that context. And so one aspect of structural racism that must be profoundly addressed is creating equal opportunity for everyone to have those kinds of learning experiences, because they don't just buy you a ticket onto Wall Street or a top law firm or to be a professor at Yale. They buy you the capacity to manage extreme emotion and be able to think clearly. Thanks for talking about conditions. What are the conditions that allow for it to share a point? It's not nothing's a guarantee, but there are conditions that have been substantiated as far as being able to evoke different types of emotional capacity, reactions to stress, availability for thriving to move from a surviving framework into one of flourishing and thriving. And we have very clear and specific conditions that do allow for that, which we can, you know, effect on much more of a societal sort of national policy, mandate creates a mandate for that, knowing those conditions. And then it becomes about sort of individualized, contextual elements, but there are some really clear conditions that either evoke a flourishing dimension for all folks in society run equity or thrive that. And that's one of the consequences when Ben was talking about the consequences to of this level of inequity. It does not allow for not just individual thriving, but also the value of thriving for large spots of the society in how that builds different ways. But also innovation, also transforming kind of nation states. We all suffer from an individual all the way to a global level from not creating conditions for flourishing. So I'm going to pick up on some of you just said, Alison, and something Charlie brought up about dissociation story of for 1515 years I traveled the country as a speaker for the American Dental Association dentist were known at one time to have the highest suicide rate of health care professionals. And there's a lot of reasons why and they're really good reasons. I sat on a committee called the Wellbeing Committee, which was a point of net safety net for dentists who were caught in the midst of their addiction, either to drugs or alcohol or whatever. And but it was to say their license so they had to come into treatment. This guy was sent to me after he had eight weeks at the before, which was preceded by a family intervention, which was preceded by years and years drinking. And when he came, he sat down in my office and looked at me and he says, I don't know why I'm here. And I said, okay, well, you know, I started to, and then he just had no he didn't have a clue and I asked him to tell me the story. He admitted he drank. I asked him to tell me the story of how the drinking started. Well, you know, I got out of dental school $250,000 debt to kids right away, building his own house building a bar in the basement of his house. He liked to drink a little bit and went on and on and on. And you know, and then I said, finally I said to him, well, look, you know, we know there's an association, very close association between stress and addiction and he stopped me calling and he said, I wasn't stressed. I said, well, what do you call it? He said, I just needed to relax. So how's that for dissociation, Charlie? Yeah. So, so, I don't know. There was another point else in that you were making it all come back to me. But I want, yeah, I just think about this. Oh, yeah, I know what it is. I think we're so many of us get dissociated when it's not happening to us. Personally, individually, it's not hurting us. After 9 11 talk radio went on and on. I was listening in one show a guy got on from somewhere. I think in the Midwest, and he said, I don't know what the big deal is about this, you know, world trip. And it occurred to me what he's really saying is a plane didn't fly into my house. What's the big deal? Yeah. And I think that's unfortunately, that goes back to the I world and the we world that we don't think about ourselves as members of a huge collective that has so many differences and ways that we can learn from each other and give to each other and challenge each other. It's just fighting, fighting, fighting, fighting. And so, yeah. I want to go back to Ralph's introductory comments again because he made this important distinction between a stressor, or maybe with Charlie who said this, I'm sorry, there being a stressor and stress. And in some ways, you know, a stressor becomes stress when we apply a certain meaning to the stressor. Not always because you'd be just describing cases where it's unconscious. But the point I wanted to make is that if one of the meetings is a story that unfolds and is a heroic act that occurred or another version where the person's a passive victim and is traumatized by them. Those stories all have meaning. There are narratives and they have a meaning to them. The association is almost a case where it has no meaning. You know, the event had no meaning. Right. And it's interesting that how much dissociation comes into play when people do not have access to narratives that make sense of any kind of narrative. If it could be something about their own personal life and what they're going through with your families and their loved ones, or it could be at a societal level. If there's no narrative for it, or one that appeals to them, they might not have an narrative and they may associate. Yeah, I think the operative phrase there, Jerry, is one that appeals to them, because, you know, I don't like that story. I'm not going to, I'm not going to connect with it. I'm wondering about the stresses we choose rather than the stresses that we're chosen for. And how do we as individuals get to know enough about what our own stress capacities are? I mean, one can have a pretty stressful life and choose to do many things, and then you choose one too many, and then you can't really function. So how do we get to know what that is? Do we have to keep a little stress computer stress counter? Well, I'll tell you a story, Beverly, as I think of a pair of twin boys and twin girls. And these boys look alike. And every time I see them, I remember now, which twin am I seeing today? And one of them suffered a loss of a girlfriend, but it was an important first relationship. And we'll talk with him modest use of antidepressants. He did very well. And the identical twin brother, two or three years they come into the same story, a similar story that lost the girlfriend. It was in college. It was a couple years later. And the twins, they're the same. They've had the same paradigm. They happen to play music together. And they were known as musical twins. They're called the mirror images with the name of their electronic guitar. So they were that close. And then the twin responded to nothing. I do the same thing. I try to have anything. I finally had to hospitalize him and give him some EST because he could not get over the loss now. And in terms of learning or genetics, we're all different. So a sibling who has, or maybe you have someone who has a sibling who's been through a stress. So this vicarious learning. Is a highly idiosyncratic response. And I learned that many times is that each person who responded to stress was common, but their reactions couldn't have been more different, even though they were identical twins. So every human being is an experiment in genetics. You got 60% from your mother and 40% from your father. He says to car. But the mix of genes gives everybody different skills, talents, or perhaps stress responses, which you don't know. But I was struck by that early on in my career. So it's hard to make. We know something about hormones and the differences of hormones. We can measure them. But there's an interior sense that's very hard to discern and say, Okay, we saw a giant deal. And when these soldiers at West Point are all taught how to shoot a gun. Yet, and I never never fire a gun. So it's a mystery, I would say, beveling about. I've had some people who are in the performing arts, some patients in the performing arts. And one of the anticipations that helps them to get through in practice is they need practice, is they imagine the applause of the audience. But then if the audience doesn't applaud to the same volume of what was in their imagination, there's a kind of collapse. It's almost like anticipatory mirror neuron phenomena. So I wonder Ben, if you, you know, you focusing on performing artists in some of your practice, if you have had examples of something like that, where the person's performance is as they imagine, but the response is not. Yeah, so I have, and I just work hard to get them into the performance, not into the imagined response, you know, like actually, it is a lot with opera singers. So, over the years I've worked a lot with opera singers and you're seeing in front of 5000 people with 120 piece orchestra and you know when people are even employed or when they're quieter. But the key in all that is what I do is I just get them really into what they're seeing into the music into the, into the shape and the emotion so that they're actually in that experience. They're not doing that experience for the result. So the key, the key teaching in the whole bug of a Gita's chapter to show go 47, don't be attached to the fruits of your action, and you have to act. So, I mean, to me, that's about presence is about you, you be in the present. We don't know how people don't react. We don't know what other people are thinking. But we know that we can really put ourselves fully into what we're doing. And the more fully we can, we can be engaged in what we're then certainly into performing arts, the way that works is that the more you're in it, the more the audiences in it. This is just a phenomenon. I discovered this early on when they kept falling asleep by the second act, you know, of any opera that they went to why because the singers were fabulous, but they weren't relating to anything that they were really singing, or to each other. And when we get them to do that, it's actually electric, and that's when we feel it. So, you know, that goes into this other thing we're talking about about the group response and the individual response and how, you know, theater is a community event. Everything is some level in that way. So, yeah, I, well, it's imagining the response is, it's like with athletes, same thing, you know, get them off the gold medal. Get them on to what is the technique where they may be having a little bit of problem that they have to really work through. And then when you work, then they play their best. We go to the audience to question and answer. And I just asked, Dr. Marma one question. Do you see that when you're dealing with the history of some of your patients that they anticipated positive response from their parents that they didn't get. Ever, and that creates a kind of chronic stress. It's a great question Beverly. I think that kind of experience. Either they didn't get the response that they expected, or they got an unempathic response. So, really can have lifelong effects on their stress resilience and their ability to flexibly cope with stresses when they're older, especially major stresses and losses. So it's very, it's very important. I think that a person's ability to manage stress is as, as Ralph mentioned, partly genetic. It's partly based in secure early empathic attachments. And the accommodation of those who in all of the people that I have had the privilege of working with the men and women who've been unusually stress resilient. They've been blessed with three things, a family history, which is relatively free from psychiatric problems. A very close empathic and loving early attachment figures and a high education. And the opposite of those three things leaves you within a killing seal. I just also, before we go to the question and answer a period, I want to respond to sort of as a public service announcement, Beverly asked the question about how do we know, because some people like to take on stressful roles. How do we know when we're about to burn out? I think that's an important question to try to respond to. And, you know, from my point of view, and I'd be happy to hear what other panelists here think, but I would say that one of them was part of the story, I think, bent hold, which is watching your consumption of alcohol and other substances. Now some of the number of legal substances is increasing. So, and illegal ones have always been there. So we have to keep an eye on the quantity and the frequency of use. Sleep quality, of course, is very important. I always ask patients how they're sleeping every session, almost the second thing I ask them. And just generally if they're feeling irritable, et cetera, those sorts of things, of course, are important markers. And unfortunately, a lot of people look away from them, even though they're occurring, but that would be that for me, how to avoid turning a hard job into one that causes burnout. So people have other ideas about that. So, so I'll just say this is something that I wanted to read because I think it's something that I go back to as far as helping me with the, the endless things that I could keep doing and drive myself into, you know, performative acts of job demands as well as personal demands. So, to that loose point. And so I wanted to read from Audre Lord, the activist and feminist from her 1988 essay, A Burst of Light, which is often quoted, but she was facing terminal illness at this time. And she kind of coined the frame and term around self care, which has now been obviously turned into a wellness meme. But prior she was, she was conceptualizing this concept of self care as caring for myself is not self indulgence, it is self preservation. And that is an act of political warfare. I had to examine in my dreams as well as in my immune function tests, the devastating effects of overextension. And that has forced me to consciously jettison the myth of omnipotence of believing or loosely asserting that I can do anything along with any dangerous illusion of immortality. Neither of these unscrewed nice defenses is a solid base for either political activism or personal struggle. And in their place, another kind of power is growing tempered and enduring, rounded within the realities of what I am in fact doing. An open eyed assessment and appreciation of what I can do and accomplish using who I am and who I most wish myself to be. So I go back to that what I want to do 50 million and one things to get a little bit grounded and engaged in self care as an act of resistance. So that's a recommendation from my end. Okay, well I think with that maybe we can open up the floor to some of the questions and we have from our audience. Alex, I want to go ahead. So this is from YouTube under the name Google user. So I don't know what their real name is but Google user. Thank you. So they wrote, it seems to me that stress is a contemporary term for anxiety or anguish. There's a widely used term. It's like analytic literature. Am I correct on that? If that is so, then I believe for me, it's very clear that anguish is independent of external reality, which accepting itself quite anguishing. Anguished seems to be a consequence of the position the subject takes and face of his own desire regardless of external reality. So what are your thoughts on that? Well, I would say one brief comment and that is that life is always accompanied by losses. We say you should be a good loser, but that doesn't exist. Nobody's a good loser. Nobody likes to lose whether you're losing your health, you're losing your fringe, you're losing money. And the question is, I think in terms of lack of a better word, acceptance that in life, everybody loses. And that people as Beverly was mentioned, who had a life of roses all along and suddenly some catastrophe is, and they're not prepared. So sometimes a loss early on that you master can give you a kind of immunity against future losses. And if there's a sense of acceptance that not everybody wins the scholarship, the Nobel Prize, whatever, and that you win in life if you have loyalty, you have friends, and that's more important in terms of helping you deal with losses to have a circle of friends who help you get through the losses. So, English, you want to call out English is response, I would say a loss and we all visited some. Okay, so I'll go on to the next one. So this was from Dave Oh, also from YouTube, and they asked, what about the angle of faith with regards to stress, in particular, how does that affect an individual's perspective on the things in life that is a wonderful question is about faith right fire heard you correctly. So we have studied the role of faith and religious belief in resilience and vulnerability to traumatic stress. What we found which may be not unexpected is that it can be a double age sword for some people their deep faith, and their sense of acceptance and the sense that loss or injury or setbacks are God's will and it's part of a deeper scheme that we don't fully understand can be very protective. People sound some people who feel that bad things should not or could not happen to good people so that if misfortune strikes them that they must have had been imperfect in their faith and their religious practice, and they suffer tremendous anguish and guilt which is unrealistic because of that. So religion can be a source of great solace, unfortunately can be for some people, a source of great pain in the face of stress. The other thing I would say add to what Charlie said is that we do associate faith with religion but faith without that association can be faith in that what's happening is happening for the purpose of me and us to grow to a better place. And that we all of our experiences are contributing, potentially contributing to contributing to our growth. If we have faith in that, we can look at our experience as educative as an opportunity for opening more for growing more for being more connected to each other. So it's not crazy about the phrase, you know, the universe is telling me, I don't know what that means, but I am quite believing from experience, both personally and clinically, that that faith that what's coming is something that I need to pay attention to that I can grow from. And when I do that, you know, my making my my bit to make the world a better place. It will say the importance to that and faith communities and what faith communities can do if you build suffer, say aspects of exclusion based on any identity but faith communities can really enrich a sense of solidarity, a sense of social support, which is critical to enduring stress and stress or so, as far as that relates, it's really quite important. It also depends what you have faith in, if it's in a false prophet or cult leader or someone who promises you that if you identify with them, you're going to be first in the world, and that's a quite dangerous thing. And I think we've suffered that tremendously personally and societally. So, I think you're going to the next one. Okay, this is from Elizabeth Manus, thank you Elizabeth, she wrote, is there anything for Ben Bernstein to say about ways that we worlders can shield themselves from the actions of, and are possibly the influence of I worlders. Thank you Elizabeth for that question I, I'm sure we all have come through four years of that with the last administration. You know, the way I see it is, is that the chain Chinese book of changes I think it's I don't remember what X-gram is, but they say the best way to combat evil and I'm going to use evil in a large sense of the word, the best way to combat evil is to make energetic progress in the good. So, you know, fighting that doesn't do produce much except more resistance or tension, but actually putting one's energies into what is contributing to others what is fulfilling of one's purpose in life. And that's the way to do it, I mean that's the way to, to shield yourself, and as Alison just said with faith communities and finding the community of people that are like minded, and they're self supported who want to do that. So, it's a really good question and something that we have to do well, but we have to deal with a lot but trying to convince the other person who doesn't doesn't go too far. Great. Okay, next question. So next one, I just want to make sure, okay, so next one is from an anonymous viewer from the zoom audience, and they wrote related to the Audre Lord quote, do we sometimes feel an ethical or religious imperative to react to certain stressful events. They're not doing so makes us a selfish or bad person. Read the last part again. So, so do we sometimes feel an ethical or religious imperative to react to certain stressful events, they're not doing so makes us a selfish or bad person. So, so, well, I mean, I hear in the question that that's the juxtaposition of, of not reacting and then folding into bad person so I hear a kind of response to the, what would I say, the kind of personal list stick. So, I think that we could put bad dynamic in the reaction to a specific event or not, and I actually wouldn't put those two things in contrast and that that's not my impression from the quote I think that, you know, we all have the position, the needs, the desire and the desire and where we sit in our perspective to respond to certain instances that move and affect and impact us. And I think that that's really important to, to listen to, and I don't, I don't think I wouldn't juxtapose it into a kind of good person, bad person dichotomy, because I think that that creates or establishes you're either the answer is yes or no and things are, I think, much more complex and nuanced from that so so I would just encourage the decoupling of reaction to an event and bad person versus curiosity around what moves me, what do I have a reaction to, what is my impact in the world, what do I want to accomplish, and using that as far as who I wish myself to become, because when we put the dynamic of kind of good person, bad person, it can shut down exploration, curiosity, reflection and engagement. And so that would be my concern with that splitting or that comparison, that conflation of reacting versus good person, bad person. And so then you're in a, in that vacillation and either it's either yes or no versus what are some of the creative and reflective solutions, reasons and reactions to the event at hand. So that's kind of my response to that question. That's interesting. I would just add, I would agree with you Alison. It shouldn't be set up as morally good and bad. The deeper question though may be given that there is an enormous amount of suffering in the world, there is an enormous amount of injustice in the world, and we want to contribute. And given that the we world is the world we want, not the high world, but I would also be careful about splitting the me, the we in the eye world too much because in order to be able to contribute to others and care for others and have the energy and resources and love and interest and thought to be able to contribute, it does require a lot of self care and self management, which is about the eye world. And you know, there's that old saying, you know, put on your own oxygen mask before assisting others. And if you don't do that, you may not be able to function very effectively. So I think it's important not to set up self care and self healthy self gratification as being bad or selfish at the time when there is a moral imperative to help each other. And just so it's something to think about. I think I think also we spoke a little bit earlier about the potential for let's say post traumatic stress symptoms, to arriving from inaction. I should have done this and I didn't, and then feeling guilty about it. And you put that together with the trolleys common earlier about religious, the two edged sword that religion can can provide. If, if a person that's a is inactive and they regret it later, and they have some remorse over it. And there's nothing wrong with that. To call yourself a bad person typically in that context means you're kind of beating yourself up about it. And that could lead to symptoms and not to any kind of resolution or growth, personal growth. So, yes, you could think I should have done more than I did that may be fully appropriate. But I think it's important not to think of yourself as a bad person in this sort of overly moralistic sense that could be corrosive. It's not helpful to further growth. I agree, Jerry, and often in my care for trauma survivors who feel very deeply that they fail to act in some way to prevent harm or catastrophe to others, whether it's their crewmates, or it's their family or their community or someone else. Often that does derive from certain omnipotent ideas and fantasies that we have the ability to foretell what's going to happen and prevent bad things when we often don't. So people carry around in them enormous sense of guilty responsibility for things that realistically they could not have known and could not have prevented. I would add to that, having seen a number of concentration camps survivors and why did they survive? Should they done something more? And one of the things occasionally I say, not too often, that life is lived forward because I quote, I think it's from Nietzsche, but we learn about life backward. And the question is whether you can develop a faggotary as long as important as memory. So you move on to the next issue. If the next thing happens, what would you do the next time that you can't change the path, but you can change the future. And I think that's the question for some reflection about you are indecisionist whether to act or not. Okay, yes, but you got to live forward and what do you want to do the next time? Okay. So, yeah, we have two more. Is that okay? Good. Okay. All right. So Linda Thorson on YouTube wrote, so do any of you associate physical exercises, stretch relief in a highly effective way? The answer is absolutely yes. That one of the best stress management tools we have is moderate daily aerobic exercise. Yeah, we will exercise our next when that question came. Right. Yeah, no, yeah, total total. Total total. I know when I haven't done it and moderate daily moderate and daily are the key words there. I think I know when I haven't done it. It's very, it's very important that it's very powerful and may be equally powerful to meditation, medication or other approaches. So, yes, it's a rest and exercise are hugely important in stress management. My survival of the aspects of the pandemic to my palaton. I mean, that's my big information, but it really helped me deeply. I think having to take a dip in cold water every morning. Oh, I don't know. I started to do that with somebody told me, like, turn on the cold shower at the end and I thought, oh, we get that. But I started to do it. And you know what? I love it. It's actually, I look forward to it. It wakes me up in a really good way. Because an author named Wim Hoth, I've never read anything by him, but apparently that's what he recommends. I just wanted to look back to something Charlie said though about the eye and because I thought it was really out. And I think it's connected to this question too, that we do have to take care of ourselves in order to really make a full contribution. You know, I traveled around the country talking to large audiences of healthcare professionals, and I would look out in the audience and so many of those people who are sure dedicated professionals look so unhealthy. Yeah. And I thought to myself, my goodness, you know, people are coming to you for what you can give them, but it's really you're giving it to them from you. And the more you can be healthy, the more you become what they want. And then you can be with help. So I think it's a great point that you may Charlie appreciate. Yeah. Remember the old story, huh? And how can you tell the shoemaker in the village, the person with holes in their shoes? No time to care for themselves. Yeah. They go back to the other question about exercise. I think a study I think was done in Sloan Kettering where they would say that a sedentary lifestyle is equal to a pack and a half a cigarettes a day. We are two-legged creatures and you say, you use it or you lose it. So the exercise is essential. I think there's a minimal amount that every human being must do every day. Otherwise, you're going to get into all kinds of health care problems. So the answer is I question, you learn that in the school, they have gym regularly during high school and elementary school. And there's a reason for that because you have to learn exercise some every day. Because that the seven days a week, that certainly should be four to five. Well, the other thing too is that those of us who make our living sitting in a chair or just close to the day, we need to get up and move around. I mean, when we're on the screen all day, first of all, putting a tremendous tax on our sympathetic nervous system because we're only using their phobia vision, which is directly hardwired to the sympathetic nervous system. We've got to get up and move occasionally between them saying this while I hear it myself. All right, after this, get up and stretch. Okay, we have one last question now. Last one, then we could all do jumping jacks after if we want. But this is from Carla Johnson. Thank you, Carlos. She wrote, are there any initiatives to move from our competitive culture to a cooperative one as one solution to chronic system. Sorry, to chronic systemic stress. That's a great, that's a great question. One thing I've learned as chair of a large department of psychiatry, and which in an environment which is very competitive, in which my faculty need to be able to perform highly. And it's something a little different, which is a blend of the two, rather than move from a competitive to a cooperative culture, we said, how do we need to cooperate together to support each other to be maximally competitive. We can perform the right teams with the right chemistry with the right mix of skills. So everyone can help each other to be successful so we can enjoy the congeniality and support of that. But at the same time we can perform like hell. So that was the kind of compromise we struck between competition and cooperation. And I would like to say Charlie, and I think one of the side effects, but benefits of the play is that it forces us to cooperate. At the cooperation in the scientific community, I would say is unparalleled. They changed their rules about practicing in one state doctors can do that ridiculous rules about doctors and nurses. But more important, even in the basic science field, the drug companies have cooperated. I was on a international phone call between Berlin, London, Paris, New York, California. And all of a sudden there was a guy from Poland, the guy was brilliant, but we would never heard of this guy if there wasn't the zoom and the cooperation. And I think the plague, whether they're banging the inputs in Italy to cooperate and say we want to take care of our doctors and nurses. I think side effects of the plague, not that we have to lose millions of lives to learn this. But I think one of the benefits of the play is certainly in the medical field and the nursing field. And the scientific research is people learn to cooperate. And in fact, most the scientific paper these days are made by teams of people is not one man discovering something in the garage and all scientific ventures and all business ventures require teamwork. And we're telling you saying what the team at NYU, we certainly make a do that. In fact, one of my jokes is in Texas where they're so rich in medical research, they have separate buildings for everything. And in Columbia, we're in a narrow island. In fact, Columbia was known the president we bought you took over. He said, this is one of the densest research universities in the country. We're all cryo the event of Manhattan. So you're going to be good to have to cooperate with your neighbors. And how big the neighborhood is depends on your view is it just Columbia or is the Columbia and Cornell and we merged a lot of medical merges failed, but by and large, I think the pandemic forced most of the we have to cooperate to survive. It's existential threat. Well, also it's good to remember that the human is a herd animal. And we were never designed to survive as individuals. We were designed to survive by caring and loving each other. We're all part of that hurricane. That's right. Another thing that I would emphasize sometimes superficially but to point out that superficial differences like skin color is one gene. Basically, we all have a common genetic aspect and we all came out of Africa together. I think in terms of recognizing genetics and what you're saying to where herd species is exactly that. So I think that's the benefit and wittingly of this pandemic. So I think that's a nice spot which to stop because it's a high point I think. And I want to thank everybody for collaborating and cooperating in this great round table today and I'm looking forward to collaborating with you all some time in the future. And gratitude is also one of the most wonderful refreshing emotions. And so I would really like to express how much gratitude I have to each and all of you for joining us with this today and making it such a rich program. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. A real pleasure Beverly. Thank you. Bye bye. Take care. Thank you, Alex. Yes. Bye bye. Bye bye.