 Whether it meets your expectations or exceeds them or doesn't meet them at all, we really want to know about it. So I'll be coming around. I'm Rob Penzer. I'm the Associate Director of the Hillards Center. Before I get to the introductions today, I just have a few announcements of upcoming round tables. Next Saturday, April 25, another John Templeton found the round table, the changing nature of free will with philosopher Akil Bill-Grami, economist Louis Cabral, theologian Brigitte Call, neuroscientist Kenneth Kishida, and mathematician Simon Kochen. Then Saturday, May 2, trauma and its after-effects, part 1, war and genocide, with historian Adam Sacks, multimedia director and publicist Gottfried Wagner, psychoanalyst Eva Vail, and journalist Phil Zabriski. Then on Saturday, May 16, humans and animals, continuities and discontinuities, with mind-body investigator Theodore Diamond Jr., animal cognitive scientist Irene Pepperberg and Diana Reese and still others. I want to let you know about the Hillards Center annual benefit dinner, which will take place Friday evening May 8, information and ticket purchases are available on the website www.helixcenter.org. We encourage you to follow us on Facebook and tweet on Twitter if you're so disposed. Now on to today's group. When I mention your name, please raise your hand so the audience will recognize you. Patricia Bauer is Asa Griggs-Kendler, professor of psychology at Emory University, where she also serves as senior associate dean for research at its College of Arts and Sciences. Her research on autobiographical memory and its development, and in particular the phenomenon of infantile or childhood amnesia, is the subject of her book, Remembering the Time of Our Lives, Memory and Infancy and Beyond, as well as author of numerous empirical articles. At her career, her work has been funded by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. She also currently directs an NIH pre-doctoral training grant on mechanisms of learning across development and species. Paul Harris is the Victor S. Thomas Professor of Education at Harvard University. His research is in the development of cognition, emotion and imagination, reflected in his past books, Children and Emotion and the work of the imagine, his most recent book, Trusting What You're Told, How Children Learn From Others, which received an Eleanor Maccabee ward from the American Psychological Association and the Book Award of the Cognitive Development Society, describes his current studies of how children learn about history, science and religion on the basis of what trusted informants tell them. Regina Pally is a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst in private practice with a special interest in parents and couples. She has studied and written about neuroscience for mental health professionals and the lay public. In 2008, she founded the Center for Reflective Parenting, whose mission is to promote healthy child development by strengthening the bonds that children have with all those who care for them through an emphasis on reflective thinking. The current focus of her writing is reflective parenting in relationship to child development, brain development and the parent-child relationship. Colin Phillips is professor and distinguished scholar, teacher in the Department of Linguistics at the University of Maryland, where he directs the Language Science Center and is a scholar of the Neuroscience and Cognitive Science program. He investigates the mental and neurocoding of language, children's effortless acquisition of language and linguistic illusions. His research has investigated 15 languages and he directs Langscape, an online portal for language diversity that combines interactive mapping with diverse resources for 6,400 languages. He's also an advantage of science, a broadly interdisciplinary field that connects fundamental science with applications in education, technology and health. Stephen Jay Wein is Associate Dean for Child Analysis Training and Supervising Analyst and Supervisor for Child and Adolescent Analysis at the New York Psychoanalytic Society Institute. In addition to his devotion to clinical practice, research and teaching, he is a member of the Center for Advanced Psychoanalytic Studies. With the late Sidney Blatt, he co-authored the Assessment of Qualitative and Structural Dimensions of Object Relations, the Object Relations Inventory. He participated for 20 years in a multidisciplinary study group on learning disabilities. In 2008, the New York Psychoanalytic presented him with the Charles Brenner Teaching Award for Outstanding Contributions to Psychoanalytic Education. Paul Zilinski is a children's book illustrator and writer, a winner of numerous awards, including the Caldicott Medal for his Retelling of Rapunzel and three Caldicott Honors for Hanselungrettle, for Rumpelstilskyn and for Swamp Angel. His styles range from Renaissance-inspired oil paintings for his fairy tales to more cartoonish drawings of the reason Z is for moose. Certain of his books, particularly The Wheels on the Bus, one of my sons, all-time favorites, by the way, communicates strikingly well with learning disabled or autistic children. He holds an MFA in painting from the Tyler School of Art and a BA from Yale College, where he was the first class that Murray Sendak ever taught. He sits on the board of the Society of Children's Book Writers and Illustrators, co-chairs the Children's and Young Adult Committee of Penn American Center, and volunteers with other organizations that promote books and literacy for children. And now on to our panel. Well, I'm particularly glad to be here today on my own turf. I guess I'm the only one who's used to this building and this organization. But many years ago, Paul and I met, we were classmates in college, although we didn't know each other in college, but I knew his name because my children grew up on the wheels of the bus and Rumpelstilskyn. And they came to the reunion, and after Paul and I started talking in the Peabody Museum where all the dinosaurs were, I asked my kids if they would like to meet him because I figured they'd be so excited about the books and actually meeting the man who had done the illustration. And my daughter was in fact very excited because she said she had never met a living author before. That might be one illustration of the difference between children and adults' lines. I didn't grow up wanting to be a children's book maker because I had the same point of you. I didn't really know that living people did them. And I had books that were very important to me, but I kind of assumed they were made by dead people. It's largely true, I guess. Well, I don't know if we should just join in, but I'm stimulated to think about, in, I've always been fascinated with why children are so fixated on stories. I used to tell my kids stories and I could do, I could take nine-hour card trips with them as long as I kept up the story. And so fast forward, now that I'm studying about the neuroscience of the brain, I'm writing a book on reflective parenting. My research, I came up, there's a lot of research on the importance of storytelling, stories, telling stories, reading stories, talking about stories, discussing stories, in terms of the development of reflective thinking in the mind, and that children learn a lot from their encounter with stories. And even part of their imaginative play is involved in making sense of how the mind works and other people, particularly other people's minds. We all have privy to our own minds, but it's other people's minds that are troublesome. And telling stories seems to be a really important component of child development. Is that different from the patterns, the importance of stories? Stories seem to be the way advertising agencies glom on to people's wish to buy things. Everything gets better when it's attached to it. It is, I think we're all drawn to stories because we can personally relate, but theoretically a person, an adult's mind should be developed by now. And the child's mind is actually developing in relationship and how they will discuss stories and what the points are that they're able to comprehend will be different. It's just a developing process. But there was a neat study published a couple of years ago, I think, it was done here in New York, and they got the adult subjects to read fiction. And after this brief dose of fiction, they tested them on various psychological insights. And the people who'd read fiction, I mean George Elliot, as opposed to John Grisham say, did better on these psychological insights. So even adults have room to grow under these circumstances. And certainly one of the most important functions of stories are stories about ourselves and about our families and about the people in our families. And it's through those stories largely that children come to establish that sense of self, that sense of self as separate from, but related to others in the family. And those stories form the core of our autobiographical or personal memories that obviously are very important to us and that we hold most dear. So Patricia, can I ask you a bit more about that because you've done so much research on infantile amnesia and the sort of recovery from it, so to speak? Recovery from it, actually, I refer to, thank you, I refer to it as the onset of childhood amnesia. We often think about childhood amnesia that as adults we have difficulty remembering the early years of our lives. And often that's talked about as when we start to have autobiographical memories as the offset of childhood amnesia. I actually think conceptualized the other way, that it's the offset when we begin to retain those stories. We're always, those stories, those events, those memories. We're always forming them, even infants. We were talking about your 10-month-old grandchild, your 10-month-old grandchild is forming memories and retaining them for short periods of time. And it's as we become able to retain those memories over longer periods of time that we see the offset of that childhood amnesia. And that's one of the centers of study in autobiographical memories. Why is it that even though children are forming memories that we as adults have difficulty retaining them? It's one of the great mysteries of in the memory research literature. So can we probe the mystery of the research? I suppose if we look back at the last 20 years of research on infants, there's been dramatic evidence of how smart toddlers are. I mean, 9-month-olds, 12-month-olds. You give them a social scene. They can work in kind to whom, who's been nasty to whom, and they prefer the person who's kind and so forth. So in some sense, they have all the intellectual or cognitive equipment to lay down a little narrative in their growing brain. So that makes it all the more mysterious that in fact virtually none of us have memories from our first year of life or even our second year of life. There's growing evidence that what we, what accounts the, the, the, this amnesia is accelerated for death. So as you say, their, their forming memories, they're able to create a representational trace. They're able to use the same brain structures that we as adults use to form those memories. But the immediate experience, cognitive work has to be done to turn an immediate experience into an enduring memory trace. And the neural structures that are responsible for that transformation are very slow to develop. And I talk about this as kind of a leaky sieve that as infants, certainly they're forming memories, but a lot of the information that makes up a memory representation kind of leaks out and it leaks out more rapidly than it does for adults. And there's actually the, there's a growing body of literature demonstrating that it could be forgetting that we think is therefore accounting for the loss of those memories that are formed and are held on and retained for some period of time, but then ultimately become the victim of a fall victim to the. So what is it that ultimately clogs that sieve and makes sure that that the holes get about this is the colander memory that if you have lasagna noodles and you have a colander with big holes in it and you dump your lasagna noodles in, the water rushes out, but the lasagna noodles stay in. But memories aren't like lasagna noodles. They're like orzo, those little tiny bits of pasta. And if you're going to make orzo and successfully hold on to it, you can't pour it into a colander with big holes, you have to pour it into one of those fine mesh nets. And what happens over the course of the development is that with neural, neural changes, we trade in essentially our holy colanders for nets. Hold the grid. So the way you're saying it there, it's suggesting that it's the container that is changing over time. So is it the orzo is changing over time? The way I cook it, it gets more sticky and it doesn't go through. There you go. I actually think we're developing cheese sauce or something of that nature. So the elements of orzo, we infants are encoding the same bits and pieces of information, maybe not as many as elaborated. And they don't have as much of the sticky stuff to hold it together. I wonder if this goes back to the point about the stories. Yes, indeed. As adults, we're good at making a story out of our experiences. We can connect all of the different things going on. Life isn't as inherently structured as it gives you is something which has the narrative made more explicitly. And it has all those connections built in. Is it the earliest stage? Is it the case that the pieces of the memories are there? But because it lacks the connections between them, because it lacks the narrative, that means that the individual pieces are more fragile. And I think that we have beautiful data to speak to exactly that. That the more coherent that story is, the longer that memory tends to live on, and less coherent memories that aren't very well connected to each other. Those are the ones that fall prey to forgetting particularly rapidly and particularly vulnerable to that kind of forgetting. So the story is the cheese sauce, the story is the starch in the pasta grains, and that really does play a very critical role in maintenance of those events and stories. So, the role of language, though, so by the time the chart is two, two and a half, they're starting to tell these little stories, which is the kind of rehearsal, which is the kind of strengthening, right? Yes, yes. Yes. And I certainly speak to that in terms of development, yes, the children have, you know, they can tell you who did what to whom. But that kind of reflection on the significance or the importance of that experience. So the fact that, you know, this actor A did something to actor B, can be encoded in a very elemental way, or it can be encoded with respect to how that impacted you as an individual and the impact it had on the actors and the meaning that that has for the child's life. And I think that that's what's critically missing in many respects in very young children. Right. So children are quite prepared in the development of the form of language. But in understanding the uses that we put it to, that tends to be much more delayed. So they will say things that we can do a little bit more than they may do themselves. You know, I think also there's a big part of this that has to do with learning or memory for what? What's the purpose? And the purpose of the infant, if I could put it that way, is to learn how to attach to that person who's going to be the reliable source of safety, comfort, soothing, not just food, but the whole emotional, social interaction. It's the very first purpose, I say, of what's going on. It comes into the world really skilled at knowing how to do that, as long as there's an environment that engages the child in that way. So what you need to know and keep in memory is really ultimately what's relevant to your life. And what isn't so relevant should be forgotten. I call it forgettery. There's memory and forgettery. And you need to forget. It's a good thing to forget what's not relevant. And because the brain, while it can hold on to millions of pieces of information, billions of pieces of information, it's still a limited place. And particularly conscious memory. How do we know? How do we know that though, at the moment? It's only sometimes in reflection, in thinking back that you see the relevance of it. Well, that actually was good. Yes, exactly, that's a really good point. We don't know in the beginning what's relevant, which is children are much, at least my understanding of it, is children are much more good at learning kind of generalities. And later on, they learn more specifics. And so they need to hold on to those generalities to see what's going on in a specific situation. And you don't know, you have to be open-ended for the many potentials. With a good specific, fairly quickly, after all, by the time they're 10 or 11 months, they're attached to a particular person. At 10 or 11 months. You're talking about it. So you're talking about it up until that point, they're more into generalities. Yes, and I think in general, it takes a long time for a child to learn. You know, there's the furry animal. But first, they learn furry animal before they learn kitty, sheep, bunny. That's what I mean. And that there are categories of experience that apply in a very general way. Which I think one of the things children are kind of learning and playing with. So they can say open-ended, yeah. But one thing we know is that memories are not necessarily accurate. And that memories change as they're needed or not needed. So clinically, if we can get one story from a child, that that is. And we've told with great detail and specificity about an event. When we talk to the parents, they say it actually didn't happen that way. And one of Freud's most moving, and I think important papers, was on screen memories. I don't know if you're familiar with that, which is the ability of a childhood event. Which has a very specific quality of being very, very clear. And often the person who's remembering this doesn't remember seeing it through his own eyes, but remembers observing it as though he were watching something else happen. And what makes the paper so moving is he talks about his own memory of an important event in childhood. And what it means for his adult experience. But I think clinically we see this all the time with kids. I think part of what they remember is what's useful in explaining something right now. I made a mistake. I was mistreated. I didn't get something that other kids got. And might not have happened. But it's remembered with absolute clarity. I think that one of the things that we find challenging is finding the expert who actually does really remember the event. And in our longitudinal studies with children, we also involve typically their mothers. Because their mothers are bringing them into the laboratory each time and are willing to participate as a longitudinal participant. And one of the things that's very striking is the fragility of adults' memories as well. So sometimes I think we overestimate the extent to which the adult has the right answer or the right perspective on the event. And sometimes it's the child whose memory may be more of a radical. What is it you really mean by memory? I think your microphone is not on my answer. You'll understand the point I'm from. Well, that's a beautiful question. What do we mean by a memory? And what do we mean by an event? An event my weekend trip to New York to participate in this wonderful discussion is the event picking up this bottle and taking a drink out of it, right? To what extent where we parse the events is also something that is, we know very little actually about how we parse events. And what's the beginning, the middle of an end of an event? And again, as you sometimes reflect back, it's the beginning of that relationship. You know, here I'm passing counter on the subway or something. But it turns out that that was the beginning of an event. And we don't always know. Well, with children, that is a key part of what develops their mind. Those experiences, those events are what is helping develop the mind of that particular child. Absolutely. It can't be just limited entities that we can bring out of them. Well, I think the thing that is important is we know, I mean even adults talk about memory of an event as if an event happened or there was a specific event or that everybody would see the event in the same way. And one of the signs of maturity, and we're going to talk about children, I mean one of the, I like to think about this, one of the purposes of childhood is to learn how to become an adult. And so as an adult, probably the greatest sign of maturity of the adult mind is the capacity to realize everything is perspectival. I like to say beauty is in the eye of the beholder and so is everything else. That everything is perspective. And the capacity to realize that your perspective is really only one perspective and there's always somebody else's perspective. I mean in this panel we could take the same water bottle, I'm sure, and have whatever number of people there are here, different perspective or even the whole. This is one of the things we're really teaching children, aren't we? About a theory of mind, thank you. I just feel like telling us the thing about a memory that I had myself that was sort of like Freud's screen memory, I guess, that I was reading a Babar book to my then very young daughter and came to a page, it was a page with monkey vision and I think it was a very important thing to say. It was a page with monkey ville where all the monkeys were climbing, wrote ladders and living in the houses in the trees. And I suddenly remembered this same page from when I was very young. It's not a memory that I remember going over and over again, it wasn't part of my life, it wasn't really an important thing. But I suddenly was seeing this thing that I had seen as a kid and it was a point, was it different? I was seeing almost the double exposure of two different pictures on the same page, I was really very disappointed with the current one. There was so much detail and imagery in the other one. So the memory of an image, it's a creative act. It must have been important to you in some way you didn't realize. And then the real thing wasn't so great. But to just take an ordinary example that everyone has been through, a kid will say he was screamed at by a teacher. And he still hears the reverberating screaming. If you actually hang around the school, I mean the teacher won't tell the truth, obviously, so you can't ask. But if there's somebody else who happened to have been in the room, they can say the teacher was angry, but wasn't screaming. Or when it happens in your own house, we all know as parents we never scream. But what kids remember is screaming, they remember horrible violence, where there was none. And I think this has to do with their conscience. It's not necessarily about cognitive structure. It's that in what we call early latency from say seven to ten years old, kids have a very primitive conscience. They're very afraid of doing something wrong and getting hurt and being in trouble. And they perceive the world so that every time they do something wrong, you know, mom is going to kill me now. And on some level they actually mean kill. And they might remember it that way. And remember that for the rest of their lives. So we have to be very suspicious of reports that we get. Of course this is true with adults as well. But it's more true in different ways, in different phases of child development, that would preoccupy as a kid at a certain stage of life is going to influence what he or she actually experiences. We all know that if we're in a terrible mood, if something horrible just happened to us, you can't see what someone else said. But it's much more true in kids because they have so much less structure. What about the reverse? I have a lot of people who have the opposite happen where they're very upset about what happened to the kid in school. You know, it wasn't fair what the teacher did. And you and you the kid's vantage point, they don't care about it so much. It wasn't so bad. I assume you have that where the parent is more anxious in a sense than even the child is. Is that... You could also argue though that as we get older we gain these structures. And if anything, those structures render us adults to distorting incoming information. Or at the very least, I don't think we're in some sense moving toward a steady state of objectivity. So you could imagine, for example, the same people listening to the same speech, but they have different political perspectives. I'm pretty sure they will have different memories of the speech, whereas if we took younger children who were less politically biased, they would probably be more uniform. So I don't think it's... you disagree. Go ahead. I think you never get to a stage of objectivity. There's no such thing. But I think kids are more limited because they have more limited minds. Well, I'm saying the richness of our intellectual abilities can be seen as an advantage, but it can also be a handicap because it leads us to assimilate, distort, and reconstruct in ways that a child will be incapable of. So to that extent, I wouldn't celebrate adulthood for greater objectivity far from it. Give me a child any time in terms of objectivity. You probably know more about this than I do, about language, but one... I had been in this very large interdisciplinary group that met every week in my office for about 20 years, a group of people like this group talked about stuff like this, and there was a linguist there. What they were telling me was that one of the reasons that children can learn language so much better than adults is because their minds are different. And kids are really into what's... where's Waldo, basically? Children are tuned into what doesn't fit, what's different, brains are constantly preoccupied with regularities. That's why they like to repeat things over and over and over again. They're very tuned in to what's different, and they're more likely to be able to walk into a room and notice that something's different, and I think that may have something to do with why they may be more accurate. We've had so many experiences that our brains fill in things, that they haven't had those experiences, so we're less accurate often, because our minds just fill in. We scan the room and we don't pay that much attention, and if you know, we might not see that your wife had a new haircut or whatever, whereas a child will hone in on it because... That's what Temple Grandon talks about autistic people and animals having their own. Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. I think that that's something to keep in mind as it's probably as much an individual difference as it is a developmental one. There's actually a reasonably large body of literature on children's memory for the atypical action or for something that's not long in a room or how to order as usual, and they are quite able to detect those aberrant or those those discrepant events and experiences. So it may be that bringing up Temple is a very good example, but it is probably as much an individual difference as it is a developmental one. We might also be talking about discrepancies between cognitive protections and the interpretations that I believe a daughter child needs at this time. So can you repeat that? I was just saying that perhaps we're talking about the difference between cognitive dimensions and the emotional ones in terms of the child's perceptual abilities, but what interpretations of the child bring to that base on their own? So it's back to the story. Back to the story. Yes, I did. I think the problem is saying, just to your point where you say you preferred the child's interpretation at the age of two of something. The child's interpretation of something may have no relationship to the actual occurrence. So when you say you will trust that more, I'm not sure. I'm not sure. Of course I'm being slightly provocative, but just slightly. But it does seem to me, I would still like to defend the point that we shouldn't assume that there's a steady progress toward objectivity, even if we never meet it or get there. I would say there may be a steady progress away from objectivity as we gradually erect these elaborate ideologies and which through which we filter what people are telling us. I think we see this. When we're looking at those cultures, so as adults, when we're encountering situations and from another culture, it's very hard for us to interpret it in the way that people steeped in that culture will interpret it. That's something we see all the same. Even within slightly different cultures that speak nominally the same language, you'll have the same expression will be undertaken to mean different things. It's very hard to overcome that. And so, consistent with what Paul's saying, children are less bound by that, but they may not be able to make, they're probably missing an awful lot that adults are putting in different ways. The reason they're missing an awful lot is they don't understand a lot. Anyone who's studied cognitive development in children comes up with the same findings that there's a steady change from a fantasy understanding of the world where there's no cause and effect, there's no sense of time, and the world revolves around me to beginning to understand that there's a difference between wishing something is going to happen and having it happen, having a thought versus acting, and fantasy. No, I think what you see in cognitive development these days is when you're looking at all the different individual pieces, the evidence that all of those pieces are there, you can see that very, very early, and children are quite precocious, but the hard thing is pulling them together into this narrative from a much more complex situation, what are the different motives going on, what are the different agents doing. The different pieces are all there very early, that's my read of how funny. What about the phenomenon that children will insist that something is true because they want it to be true, and it can't be? We don't consider kids who say that to be liars. You can only lie if you know the difference between what's true and what isn't. At that point, we say the child said something that isn't true, or the child took something that didn't belong to him, they have to be older before we can say the kid is a liar and a thief. I don't quite know how to conceptualize this, and I don't know how to sum up the results, but as Colin is saying, all of the laboratory research, the empirical literature on infant development is really quite of one voice that children have what will be referred to as, or infants have what will be referred to as a very sophisticated understanding of causality. In order for this to cause this to move, they have to actually make contact with one another, and if this just comes and stops and then this starts on its own, that's not a cause. They have these understandings, Paul referred earlier to the perception of the helper versus the hinderer in these elemental visual events that are staged for infants. So there's something between that infant perception and the child's declaration of how they're using those bits and pieces of information, but the basic cognitive elements, the basic raw materials are evident very early in infancy, and whether it's the same together or the contextualization of them in the real world complicated interactions that people have, but I think it's based on the empirical literature, I don't think it's the best characterization to say that it's lacking. It's there in some form. But what's your understanding about why it can't be used? Until later. Colin? That's the really hard thing. There's a very clear contrast, so take famous findings about children's difficulties in reasoning about false beliefs, for example. It's very robust and very clear that even through age four, you're going to have trouble with that. And that's as true as it ever was. What makes it all the more interesting is that now you can demonstrate that, was it eight month old or twelve months? It's all in the first year. Late in the first year of life, you can show that there are key elements of that place that doesn't change the fact that the four year olds are still as hapless as they ever were. And so it's something about putting that into use, which, in more complex situations, which is the real challenge. Well, I think that's true throughout development, it's not just in infancy. I mean, you see teenagers, you can measure children's teenagers' reflective function, and it's as high as adults. They can't use it. Or they choose not to. They choose not to, but they're, but, and it's considered to be somewhat related to brain connectivity, because the brain doesn't mature until we're in our mid-twenties. And so having a capacity and being able to use it in the appropriate context is different. And I think maybe that's a little bit like what you're talking about. Absolutely. And that's why kids need so much scaffolding, because the parent provides help with the context of how and when to use whatever those skills are that they... And being able to record that this is a situation where rule one applies, and then being able to execute rule one. Both of those are important steps that kids aren't always taking. In children's books, as long as there's been kind of an industry of children's books, there's been a controversy with one side saying children should be exposed to the real world and things that are like their life, and other side saying there should be fantasy and beautiful, wonderful things. And there are these two arguments that don't ever have a meeting point, but I saw a quote that E.B. White, who wrote, it was, I think, about when he wrote Stuart Little about Little Mouse, who was born to human parents on 14th Street. And he said something like little children jump over the fence that separates reality from make-believe like little spring box. He said the fence that will throw a librarian has nothing to jump over. That's a great... That's a great... Well, I'm sympathetic with Stephen, though, because this in reality is what you see in kids. And whatever the discrepancy is between the research and the actuality, because this is really so much a part of what... Well, certainly analysts are teaching kids who have real troubles with this, but obviously this is also the role of a parent is to help the child make those distinctions. One of the things we talk about is the difference between hot cognition and cold cognition. So hot cognition is in the moment when your sibling is stealing your toy or you got caught with your hand in the cookie jar, you got caught lying, right? And that we may be... we may reason differently in that kind of a hot situation than we do in the laboratory, where everything else, every other possible source of variance is taken out. The room is draped in a black cloth so that the infant won't be turning her......over here looking at the stimulus, right? The sound is controlled, everything is controlled. So part of it is that embeddedness in this rich world in which we live and the complications that arise when you're not the only actor, when there are other actors and each one of them is contributing something. And I think it makes it... that alone makes it more challenging to bring out those pure rules or that reasoning. Right, so that in that way those types of experiments, they're like stories. So stories strip away a lot of the irrelevant stuff. What makes mystery movies hard is that they deliberately throw in lots of irrelevant stuff to throw you off. And life is more like that. And an experiment with a very young child, like a story is something that pulls out all the distracting stuff. Can I ask a broader question? The two psychiatrists, psychoanalysts. So, I mean, if I look back over the last 20 or 30 years in developmental psychology and to some extent developmental psycholinguistics, you see an increasing acknowledgement, as we've been saying, of the really competent... the competence of the infant, whether it's with respect to the understanding of cause and effect or social relationships or even good and evil. And so the sort of classic picture of the child being ego-centric, confused about fantasy and reality, and only in the course of the preschool years, conquering that naivety. I mean, I think we've moved away from that somewhat negative portrait. Now, I think that there are all these complications about how to reconcile child's behavior under these circumstances with the child's behavior under these other circumstances. But, okay, but nevertheless, there's been a pretty big revolution, and we're much more dazzled by what young infants and preschoolers can do. Are you saying to me that in psychoanalysts or in psychiatric theory, nothing much has changed? You still assume that there are these deep irrationalities, these deep naiveties, these deep tendencies to deny reality. Well, I would say this is back to the question of why is there such a difference between what's found in basic research and what we experience in real life. And in clinical work, we deal with the kids the way they present themselves. We don't have the opportunity to study their capacities. So, for example, if there's a study that shows that teenagers have the same reason as adults do, nobody would want to live in a world run by teenagers, right? Because something else gets in the way. I don't know if you're wrong by adults. That's hard enough. And it's an idealized version of adults because most adults don't function on that level either. But there are other issues that gradually change, right? The kind of self-centered falsiveness and fear of ones that characterize teenagers softens and changes. It might not change 100%, but it gets a little better as people get older and more tired, right? So we also see in adolescents people committing themselves to all sorts of ideologies, extreme political movements. We don't see young children doing that. Well, actually, I think psychoanalysis fortunately has embraced all of this science. In fact, psychoanalysis, I mean, you know, the adenocesion is the best, one of the best examples of this. And that psychoanalysis are embracing neuroscience, child development, all these factors. In the environment of real parents, helping real kids, you discover that children have these just really different ways of thinking about the world, and they need help with it. They need support. You know, when a child thinks, you know, the teacher hates them and that the teacher actually really does hate them, if that's the child's experience. That child actually really needs a supportive environment to help them see it differently. Does it change the way in which you react to the children's needs? So if there's a difference between the capacity not being there and the capacity needing some help to make its way through all the other obstacles, does that have any impact on what you do to help the children? Or does it in the end not make a difference? That's a good question. I haven't had their questions before, but I would hope it would. I would hope it would. I mean, you know, we now know that children are having this incredible capacity for empathy, even. You know, we've something we didn't think about before, and so I do think it has influenced how we raise children. If I understand that what the discussion is going in the direction of that, in a way we've been underestimating how much kids, children, little children, infants, I don't know if the word is understand or are capable of, or, but how much is different? In other words, what's the other side of that? Because obviously children are not the same, are not thinking the same at the age of two as they will at the age of 12. So what is different? What changes are the direction of towards adulthood? We could all retire if we knew the answer to that, I think. Certainly one of the things that's changing, and this is not to say that this is the only thing that's changing, right? But one of the things that's changing is that children, with development, we become experts in more and more areas. We learn more content. And things that we can't underestimate, the extent to which children have, in some cases, some very sophisticated looking reasoning abilities, but they have much less content over which to use and apply those reasoning abilities. They have many fewer experiences. They don't have the political indoctrination, and therefore they don't know the way the political beliefs hold together. Politics maybe is way too old, but even the politics of the school yard, they have less understanding of relationships. They have less content over which to apply some of these fundamental cognitive operations. And as I said, that's certainly not the only thing that's changing, but it is one of the things that's changing. And we do see that when children are experts in a domain, their reasoning looks more adult-like than when they are the novice in the domain. And that's even when the adult may be the novice and the child is the expert, and what you'll see is in that particular domain, that children actually can outperform the adults. You take them out of that and they look just like a kid again. Within that expertise, they're able to use some of these higher level, higher order cognitive processes. The other thing is executive function. I would imagine, would have to play some role in us, that you can have an ability, but if you can't control your impulses enough to be able to display that ability, then I would assume that has some... So I think maybe you're correcting a misconception of mine. I took my grandson a number of years ago when he was around four years old on the subway. And so we went to the subway and I said we are going to take... And he couldn't figure out what's the difference between the subway and the express. So if I understand you correctly, if I had prior to taking him there, explained to him that the subway is a train and it has one level, it's local, and then you go down and it's an expresser, that if I had been assigned to him, he would have understood and would not have asked that question. Whereas I thought he didn't yet have the ability to conceptualize the notion that a subway can be expressed or local. I think that's a very good example. And we could actually do that experiment. That would be a easy experiment to do, but I think that's exactly right. That we make a lot of assumptions about what other people in our world know, and most of the time we're pretty accurate about that. And it's when we misunderstand what someone knows that communication becomes very challenging. I find actually when I do things for little kids, and I also go to schools and I talk to them sometimes. And my wife was a retired teacher, I mean she was a long time, not a retired teacher, but a teacher. And she would help me out a lot of times if I was going to say this or have done something in a book or with kids. And she'd say, well, you said this, but they thought that. And it was the most difficult and interesting thing for me to learn what I wasn't thinking through, what I was assuming that kids just didn't have the content knowledge to know about. And that's sort of one of the most difficult things about, or specialized maybe things about being an adult dealing with children, and just realizing what it is that you should know if they don't know, how they're going to misinterpret obvious things that you say in some creative way. This sort of thing happens all the time. So I can give just one example, this is something that happened at home yesterday. So when there are lots of verbs that talk about different things we do, and you know, you can hit the table, or you can read a book, and you know, eat is also a transitive verb. You can say, I ate, right? But when you say I ate, it doesn't just mean you ate something, right? It means you ate something appropriate to a mealtime, right? So yesterday, my daughter who's 13 came home from playing with her friends, and my wife said, did you eat yet? And she said, pretzels. And I was very impressed with that, because what that showed is the understanding that to say yes to that would imply the declaration that she had eaten an appropriate to a meal, and she recognized that pretzels wasn't. And in that dialogue, you know, that showed the kind of sophistication that we normally take for granted, but things like that are buried in everything we do. That's a great example. Did you ask her if she took a shower? Two weeks ago. And it also shows a sophisticated level of reflective thinking, because it implies that your wife understood what she meant by pretzel. And that she knew her mother would understand. So in that brief communication, they had an amazing amount of understanding of how the other person would perceive what they're doing. And that's what makes things so hard for younger children. So understanding literally what was expressed there wouldn't get you anywhere. And a lot of the problem that you have with young children is they can, in some ways, they're very sophisticated in terms of what they know about what are possible things to say. But all of the additional things that go into understanding the motives of what is said and what is not said, that's the sort of thing where kids seem not to be that precocious. And it's because of... I think that helps some of this discrepancy. They don't understand the motives. There are a lot more literal or concrete. That comes step by step. There are different parts of it. Again, you can show that some of those abilities are there if you put people in the kids in the appropriate setting. But we do this all the time very quickly without even realizing what we're doing. And that's where there's huge opportunities of misunderstanding. So a related example of this, which is that from time to time when my children's friends have come over, I've indulged chronic remarks. Since you and I are English, we know we are tempted to do this from time to time. And my younger sons turned to their friends and said, don't worry, he's trying to be funny. He's just trying to be ironic. So, yes. But the feeling is mutual. I didn't know what the structure of this roundtable was going to be. So I've been collecting children's jokes for the last few weeks in a very scientific way, interrupting sessions and making it seem like it was part of the session to say, what's your favorite joke? And I made a long list of these. Children at different ages. And they're very different and they're very predictable at which ages certain things are very funny. And they change over time. I'm not going to tell any of them because none of them are funny to an adult. But these kids... Some of them are more youthful than I ask me. Well, the idea that there could be a premise, that there's somebody named Ha-ha-ha, standing next to his friend whose name is Oh, Shut Up. And another friend saying, who cares, and the policeman just happens to interview them, is not something that I would ever tell at a cocktail. It's funny. Yeah. What about language? Language. What about it? It's very rich. A lot of things happen very quickly. Children have figured out, by the time they're 12 months of age, they've figured out the sound system of their language. They're very good at distinguishing languages. They're acquiring a vocabulary. By the time they're age three, they've figured out most of the world order properties of the language. They have a vocabulary in the hundreds. When they're age five, they're out performing technologies that Google and Apple have spent billions on. And yet, putting that to use in complex, interactive situations, that's the thing that's hard. So what we find, it's interesting quite often when you look at kids who are delayed, the children's language development seems to be ahead of much of the rest of their cognitive development in the sense that a lot of the things that count as cognitively sophisticated develop later than things that count as linguistically sophisticated. So you can look at some populations so rare, but very interesting cases, the syndrome known as William's syndrome, right? Which, for a long time, they were thought to be severely cognitively impaired and precocious. It turns out that's not really true on closer inspection. Really, their language is more or less consistent with the rest of their cognitive development in most respects. It's just that language development is so accelerated that if you put it in the context of cognitive delay, you still look linguistically quite good. Although, going back to what you were saying earlier, is it fair to say that even if the grammar and the semantics is rich and complicated, the pragmatics takes a lot longer to be mastered? I think that's the clear consensus on what things are right now. The things which involve relatively formal routines, children have got that quite very well, things involved in building a large vocabulary, things involved in building literal interpretations. They're great, but the pragmatics which plays such a role in what we do most of the time, that takes a long while because in order to learn the pragmatics, you need an awful lot of other things. You can learn a lot about language without being that cognitively developed, but to get the rest of it, you need the rest of the structure to be in place. So, back to young babies again, I've been recently really impressed by some work, a lot of it going on again in New York, where there's an infant watching two adults, or it could be two cartoon figures, but it iterates. The infant sees this person, for example, showing a particular object in front of her, and it might be out of reach, and this person then vocalizes, and the child watches as the other person either responds appropriately by handing her the object she prefers, or responds inappropriately by handing her, as it were, the wrong object. But what's amazing about these studies is that these ten, eleven month old infants seem to grasp how communication works, even at that age. So, they don't necessarily have any words themselves. It can be indeed a nonsense word that this speaker utters. So, I'm wondering if you have any thoughts about the extent to which, so I guess my, but it this way, in my working assumption for a long time, children gradually work out what communication is for, insofar as they engage in it, they discover what a handy tool it is, so to speak. But here we see these infants sitting back, being a spectator, a third party, and yet grasping the cognitive consequences of the information the audience has received, is it the language the local audience has received? Right, yeah. So, I think this is another situation where we're seeing that when strips down to the bare minimum, there's a capacity that's there, so maybe it's even at the pragmatic level where kids are most delayed, the ingredients of that are in place. I think we need to be a little bit cautious about how we interpret some of these findings about the young babies at age, because what is generally shown there is there is some degree of sensitivity in this carefully designed task, so they're not behaving randomly, so there's something there. The way that then gets presented is, kids can do this, and that's a little bit of an extension, and then as we know from people who are dealing with kids in real situations, now kids really can't do it, and they can't do it for much longer, so the main, even there, some of the things that they need are already in place, but making effective use of those tools is such a knowledge-intensive task that it's going to be very hard to do that in practical situations for a long while after. And I think what we haven't got to in the science is so much working on how do we take those basic skills, and then work towards scaling them up to other things. A lot of the action has been in showing why our kids can do these amazing things, a lot of people have built careers on showing kids are geniuses, and that there was a nice piece in the onion five or six years ago which headlined Newsflash Babies. And it's very informative because, yes, we know that babies are limited, but there's, you're not going to get... By the way, babies aren't very smart, but how do we go from these pieces of genius that they have to putting that to use in practical situations, which is where we are now, and that's going to be a long-out job. And one of the problems that we have is that we tend to be, at least in the scientific literature, there are people who study infants, and there are people who study children, and that transition, you know, as the infant becomes a language user, as the infant becomes able to direct her own action and to be to locomote independently, and all of those accomplishments, we have a dearth of information on what happens in the second and third year of life, basically. You have the infant studies where the baby will sit and watch, right? And then you have the verbal studies where the child can actually be countered upon to listen to an instruction and respond appropriately or not, right? But at least they can listen to the instruction and make a verbal response. And there's that territory in between that is really still not well researched, and therein is going to lie some of the answer to this, these paradoxes of this early competence and later lack of performance, essentially. Can you ask about the nonverbal? I mean, the baby is mostly nonverbal, and so what influences do you think that plays on the development, or how the infant is experiencing the world? Because I'm thinking about your example, and I'm thinking of, you know, like all the nonverbal cues that would cue into what's going on in that situation. The baby only has the nonverbal, but we go pretty far in our communication with people with nonverbal. So I'm just wondering how much information can be gleaned in that kind of a situation from nonverbal versus verbal. And one of the ways that people have come about that, attacking that very question is through comparative research, where you ask whether Kapuchin monkey or whether a Reese's monkey or a chimpanzee or a dog. Increasingly we're seeing the literature on dogs as comparative subjects, and that's one of the favored ways that we go about addressing those questions, because there you don't have even that latent capacity for language that you're considering. And some of these abilities, I don't actually don't know if the helper hinderer has been done with a nonhuman primate. Do you know why? I don't know if it's been done, but my guess is that people's family pets in some cases might be able to solve some of these problems based on exactly some of that sensitivity to where people are looking. Dogs do joint reference, where if I look at this and then look at you sharing that reference in people's pets, dogs, we'll solve that task. And that's obviously critical for understanding these kinds of interpersonal situations of what the person wants or is trying to accomplish. If you don't have that component ability of being able to understand that this is the object for both of us, you're not going to be able to solve that problem. So I actually don't know what the comparative literature says, but that's one way that we try to ask those questions. Yeah. So pursuing that theme then, the comparative evidence I think is certainly setting aside dogs, since there are somewhat special cases, they've lived in human society and been selected within human society for a long time. So if we take chimpanzees, I mean, one of the differences, I think, important differences between chimpanzees and human beings, is that chimpanzees don't really... Yeah. Yeah. And point, I mean, some sense you could argue that pointing is the very first stepping stone to some ordinary communication among human beings, because, yeah, you can, as you were saying, use pointing to converge on the same object or to call some of his attention to something, or even sometimes to ask a kind of question. I mean, you can point to something in an interrogative fashion. I think it's the beginning of at least whether the baby has the capacity before pointing or not, but at least the first demonstration that the baby shows us, that they have some... Why? Sorry, just the baby points. The baby points, the mother points, but that they are each pointing about something that's in their mind. They have an intention, they've seen something, and then they have an intention to share what they've seen. I mean, that's my understanding. This is the simplest story. It's the simplest story. Okay. Yes. It's organizing the experience that's around you and saying, okay, it's about this. Yes, it's about this. Right. But I want you to pay attention to what the aboutness is for me. I mean, I think that's the joint part. So there's some fascinating work published recently on cross-cultural variation in pointing. So they did a study in China, the Netherlands, and the Mayan community in South America. All they did was to ask the adult to carry the toddler into a room with various interesting things, hanging to look at, so to speak. And they looked at the frequency with which the infant pointed to these items, or indeed the caregiver, pointed to these items. And the most active pointers were the Chinese caregivers, followed by the Dutch, followed by the Mayans. So I don't know whether these were dedicated grandparents with one particular grandchild to focus on their attention on. But at any rate, they were up and running, so to speak, earlier than the Dutch had done the Mayan group. Does it correspond to any observable difference in how the children develop? Well, it does. So there's good evidence that early pointers build their vocabulary more rapidly. So there's a headline there. Excuse me? There's a headline there. Yeah. Point to your infant. Oh, God. The only vocabulary developer is up at a pointer. Or that early vocabulary is a better pointer. Although, so we'll know soon because a colleague of ours is carrying out an intervention study where she's encouraging mothers to point more on. And so we'll see whether that has a knock-on effect with respect to later language development. So, yeah. So little books for very, very young children are often... Wordless books are supposed to be for the youngest children, which just seems to be appropriate to this discussion. You don't get wordless books for older people very much. And yet, I mean, there is language in the stories they tell. I mean, maybe these books are designed so that people will use language to read the books to children, but they do go through them and find thing, thing, thing. And also the very youngest board books that are made for children, they tend to discourage there being too much story in them. And often they're just this thing, then this thing, then this thing. Maybe the final thing has some ironic relation to the rest of them, probably so that the parent can have some relief for the end of this of these seven, eight things. But I just thought maybe that's something to throw in there. Yeah. I can't children. Do they tell the stories without the picture? I mean, without words. Without words, yeah. That's what it's worth. Although, if this research on spotting helpers and hinders is correct, the idea is that you could have a little figure pushing somebody up the mountain on one page and having a smart... You know, a smile of the next page, and in some sense, the implication is the infant would be understanding it, and then you could have a villain who comes along and pushes them both back down again. So anyway, it's possible that these publishers are underestimating the story comprehending capacities of one year olds. I don't know. We all understand facial expressions from very early, don't we? Yes. What we know is that babies differentiate facial expressions. It's actually been very difficult to get evidence that they actually understand them. So from a very young age, babies will look preferentially at a happy face, as opposed to a frowning face or an angry face. But it's really not necessarily clear that they understand the implication behind that. You're saying that it may be that it's likely that they don't or that we just can't figure out a way to talk to them so that they can explain it out of her. We've been very clever about asking the questions, and I think we still don't know that they really understand the implications of those emotions. Until they are about nine months of age, they're very, very clear that they're understanding a wary look on an adult's face or a happy smiling face. They'll approach things, you know, a novel object. If I smile at the baby, the baby will come and approach that. If I do this and look very afraid, the baby will approach the object or across the room or this can also be done with other people. So if I make an angry face at you or something and there's a baby, then she will not befriend you. But at nine months, it's very clear. Earlier than that, it's much less clear. But even this evidence is sort of black and white. I mean, black and white in the sense that the baby thinks this is an approachable person or an approachable object, or let me stay away. So it's not very differentiated, this emotional lexicon. That's true, right. Of course, there are some people who never learned to do that. Well, that's true. Right. And that's, they're a clinical clinician and they don't recognize facial expressions, or they don't know how to interpret them. And they don't know how to interpret them verbally how to figure it out. So that raises an interesting question because if you look at a lot of emotion research in psychology, it's been hung up on facial expressions, in my opinion, rather too narrowly. So I could imagine a person who did have that facial problem, so to speak, but nevertheless, setting the state had a pretty good conceptual understanding of what particular emotions were like, their consequences, and so on and so forth. Or is that not the case? That you have to have that decoding ability in order to build up the conceptual understanding, but it can't be used in real life. And they have to be taught how to use it, which is something that you're going back to over and over again in this discussion that the capacities can be identified. But then the question is, why aren't they put to use more naturally? There are kids and adults who always get it wrong. And it's a very dangerous thing. If you don't know whether someone's angry at you or whether someone's cheating you. Right. Can they pick it up through other cues? They have to be taught. It doesn't come naturally. But can they be taught to get it through faces? People try to do it. I don't know how successful it is. Didn't these expressions appear on their faces? They have facial expressions. Yeah, so. But they can't remember the association even on their own face. No, it's a disability. It's true of many autistic children. Well, this is where the whole mirror neuron system kind of becomes relevant that we have the system matching. We match the particularly facial expressions, but we match behaviors. And the matching system happens right from birth pretty much where, you know, when the mother makes a kind of person of her lips, the baby will match that. And this expands and, you know, to facial expressions. But what happens is our own body is connected to our whole body physiology. So my facial expression is just the outward manifestation of some emotion I'm feeling unless I'm deceiving you. And so that body physiology is connected to that facial expression. And the brain seems to be wired to match those facial expressions in others. So theoretically, at least, you're having some physiologic inner experience when you have that facial expression. And when my body matches that in you, it starts to activate my body physiology, and that's how you transmit to me in some way. That you're having that feeling, and I know you're having that feeling, and it's the beginning of learning about the connection between the face and the body and the emotion and the feeling. And people with autism have some kind of impairments in their mirror neurons. We lack some of that linkage. And other disabilities. And other disabilities. It's not just autism, it's the clearest example of things. When my first son was born being a developmental psychologist, he was in two minutes. I tried a little experiment, which was to stick out my tongue. And he thought about it. But then he did stick out his tongue, but then I panicked because he wouldn't put his tongue back in again. You've broken him. Psychoanalysis would cure it eventually. He eventually did, I may say. But going back to your point, I'm not sure. I would hesitate to say that we've always figured out the meaning of somebody's facial expression by resonating in some sense to it. It seems to me we could also have, I mean, I would be tempted to say we would want to understand that somebody was angry without not feeling some minimal anger ourselves or our selves or ditto for sadness or fears. So here's actually here's some good evidence. So we were talking about empathy a moment ago. And you do see in the second year of life toddlers being quite empathic. So if even a parent or a sibling is in distress, they will sometimes go over and pat and hug. But you don't necessarily see them showing distress themselves. It's as if they recognize what the distress is, but it doesn't require some kind of mirroring of the distress in order for them to behave appropriately. I think the excitement about this notion of mirror neurons has in some ways been an impediment because I think one thing that is important is understanding connections between things you're seeing out in the world. How that relates to things that you do. That's obviously very, very important. People went crazy with the idea that there were these little cells that solved the problem. And the message that I think we've got through all of this discussion is making all these connections much more complicated. And putting the blame on just that there's some little tiny piece that suddenly solves that trivializes the problem, I think. And probably stands in the way of figuring out all the complicated things you actually have to do to do this successfully. It's the harder part. I mean, the notion that you have things that are shared between speaking and understanding. We've known about that for thousands of years. That's called words. A word is something which is the link between things you say and things you understand. And what we're talking about in all these other domains is you need to understand the connection between things you experience and things you do. And it's kind of hard. And there's not a single piece solution. If it's okay with you, I'll ask the audience for questions. You have to get it. I think I was allowed to. No, it's not for the recording. What we're recording. It's going to turn out not to be worthy of having come up here to use the microphone. So I'd better think of something really significant to say now that I'm standing here. I've been a teacher for 52 years in the same school, so students have memories of me that go back more than half a century. And I'm often stopped in the deli or on the subway by a student who will say to me, I'll never forget the day that you. And I stop them. And I say, before you recall this memory to me, was I crazy that day? Or did I say something significant? Only once did the student say, I'll never forget the day that you stood me up in front of the class and embarrassed me. And that was a student of 52 years ago, and she'd been waiting 52 years to sit in the building. Most of the other times, I've come out pretty good. But I have occasion to speak to teachers, especially graduate students in schools of education, and I tell them, you get a group of students in your room, they close the door, they let you along with them for 40 minutes, and you are creating memories that can live a lifetime. And you will forget those experiences, but you'll be amazed at how many times you will be reminded of something you said or did that you've forgotten decades ago, but have lived on in the memory of somebody else. Scary. The other thing I want to say about the kid who goes home and says, the teacher yelled at me and threw me out of the room. When the teacher reprimanded that student in a mild voice and then just opened the door and said, I think you'd better go out because you're disturbing the class. Isn't it to the students, the child's advantage? Not so much to remember the experience that way, but to relate it with that exaggeration, because it then paints the picture of the student as an innocent victim of a crazy monster of a teacher and takes the emphasis off what the kid did to, I'm the victim of this brutal monster. And since I have the microphone, there's one more thing I want to say. You talk so much about amnesia, and I wonder if we're living through a different age now, because every parent and grandparent has a cell phone, which is a high-quality video camera, and is constantly recording every second of a child's. In my day, I'm sure that there are so many people in this room of a certain age who have very few snapshots of themselves as children, let alone videos, and if the videos were on eight millimeter film, they were black and white and silent, but now everything is being recorded constantly, so more than at any time in the history of humanity. So does that take the place of the need for memory? Do you really have to remember anything if everything is recorded and instantly play backable? And then when you see it years later, it's not so much that you remember being there and doing that and saying that, as that you have concrete proof that it happened because you're watching the recording of it, so that's what I have to say. I actually thank you so much for that. I actually think that we are creating a society, probably a world of people who are going to have fewer memories for exactly this reason. It's going to be more and more difficult to be able to separate what is your memory, what is your internal recollection and your internal representation of that event, relative to the thing that you saw in this disembodied, this little rectangle that you carry around. I actually think it's going to have, I think we're destroying our culture frankly with all this, but I think it's going to be more and more difficult to separate what is my memory from what is an external representation of that event. But when people started writing letters, couldn't there be a similar form of anxiety about the extent to which, you know, narrating some experience to your family members interfered with the pristine memory you had had before you started writing the letter? I think possibly the difference there is that that's your output. So when I'm writing a letter, I'm writing about my own internal representation as opposed to looking at something that is physically separate from me and then there are these actors in it and one of those actors is me. I think it's a different representation and therefore I think it will have different implications, but it's a great question. The opportunities to rewrite what happened are so great when you can photoshop. I don't remember exactly, but I remember hearing or reading about that anxiety when writing came into existence, that it would destroy, you know, you would memorize the entire odyssey and now you don't have to anymore and culture will crumble and maybe it did. But I do think that that was brought up. But I think memory has an important emotional function. You know, almost every parent who comes to me with a child who's having trouble says I never ever spoke that way to my parents. I'm not so sure they did. And I had occasion a few years ago to see some old home movies of my early childhood with my sisters, and I think the three of us would say that things that we saw in that film could never have happened. I certainly never treated my sisters the way these fake movies show itself. Fantastic. That's great. Thank you very much. I'm getting back to early childhood education myself at a time where people my age would be retiring. So I've been struggling to try to figure out, you know, how an adult functions, you know, for a lifetime. Because I was taught to be infantilized, you know, that's the secret to success. But anyway, I'd just like to share first of all, I have a little video on YouTube called No Adults Left Behind. We're going to have five-year-olds who live on two hundred feet who talk about life with more understanding than adults. What makes you happy, say, why do people lie, cheat and fight? But the five-year-olds answered, you know, and I asked them, if you, what would your gift to the world be? Five-year-olds were able to say, my gift to the world, everybody should share. People should help each other, be friends, get along together. A little girl looked very sad. Everybody should stop fighting. So five-year-olds can manage to put it together as the emperor's new clothes. A child is the father of the man, things like that. Also creating my educational launch, it's called I-Openers and Mind-Openers to help kids with attention learning disabilities build their ability to focus and pay attention naturally by doing vision-based eye exercises. So this other thing, the developing brain, which is still new to, you know, the fathers of compulsory education and all of that. Like, for instance, Oliver Sacks, you know, in his book, Seeing Voices. It's all about children who are brought up. A lot of deaf parents have normal hearing children. But they learned sign language first, which is a more natural way, or ancestors learned sign language before we learned to talk. So when children have been developed, trained that way, he says, it's also laying down the neural pathways with which language it's syntax is based in your head, and four-year-olds are outperforming high school students in spatial relationship tests. So it's the natural way the brain is put together, and then somebody, you know, like you know who Alice Miller is, right? She said, emotion attaches meaning to experience the drama of the gifted child. Without an emotion, nothing means anything. So hardly anything was saying that you cannot literally create any meaning or sense without adding emotion to the situation. And with the vision-based work that I'm doing, believe it or not, in a state of nature, how it brings evolve, you can't see without moving your eyes. A human brain is capable of being aware of seven streams of awareness simultaneously. Because ironically, when we read and write all the lives, we lock up our eyes on static letters, don't move our eyes, and we, like, dumb down our awareness by almost six to seven hundred percent. So seven, when you hear some of these things that we're talking about a seven-point awareness and that this focus on reading and running, because our end, you know, had no idea what the brain was capable of doing. I mean, they thought the brain was a place in your head where a sperm was stored. I mean, that's the father of enlightenment, how? But anyway, when you hear some of these things about human potentiality, this four-year-old's outperforming high school students, seven-point awareness, and maybe a responsibility that people like you, who know understanding, might have a certain responsibility to bring some of these ideas into compulsory, everyday education, besides STEM and STEAM and CORE, you know. Okay, but I'm just, when you hear these things about human potentiality, these greater awarenesses, I'm just curious, how do you respond, where the child is developing it and has it naturally, and so much of education is about how to eliminate it, because we're following, you know, a two hundred-year-old model of, okay, thank you. Well, I actually think we, I work with schools a lot, and I have to say, I think some of these ideas are really getting incorporated, into schools. Maybe not some of the struggling public schools so much, but there's a lot of private schools. Charter schools are popping up all over in Los Angeles, anyhow, and are incorporating that children have an enormous capacity for learning. If you let, if you follow their lead, if you let them learn what interests them, and the other thing that really seems to enhance learning is being able to actively participate in the learning process, so instead of just, I think some of this is even happening in the public schools in Los Angeles, instead of just teaching chemistry, the kids are really engaging in active learning, and so I think a lot of the ideas about what is enhancing learning for kids is actually being incorporated. I don't think we're as stuck as you are presenting it. I think financial limitations are where keeping people stuck rather than any kind of philosophical or educational bias. There's maybe more than financial limitations which is, old farts are getting in the way as well because you can have children learn those things successfully and learn how to be effective learners, but then when people come along and say, well, tell me what, tell me which things you know, and finding that children who are effective learners, they're equipped to acquire new information effectively to discover new things throughout life. If they don't meet certain expectations that were established, like tests, like facts, right? Like things you can Google. Then they deem to be failing. Yeah. Hi. I'm making a movie about what parents ought to be doing for their kids right now to have them ready to respond to the world of tomorrow, particularly vis-a-vis climate change. And we sort of have taken as our premise that the world's going to be changing fast and that kids have to adapt to things that they can't necessarily see or observe in very sort of altruistic and synthetic and complicated ways involving working with other human beings. So my question to you guys would be, what do you think parents and grandparents are to be doing with their kids right now to help them develop those kinds of skills? What do you do with your kids to help them ready to get ready for the world of tomorrow, basically? If you could really know, depend on your ability to inculcate values and ideas that will last past data lessons and past the point where politics enters into them and everybody changes and becomes horrible as adults, that would be great maybe. I'm afraid of too much terrifying children with the destruction of the world to come and the fact that the idea that they would have any responsibility for it and that the idea that you should do something to fix it may be very nice, but part of that is the idea that if you don't do it, it won't get fixed and you're responsible for it. That's the element of this whole bringing. We must fix climate change to children. I think it's so much an issue for the adults who are in control of the world to fix, and that it's outside of the power of children to actually do something about it. And when you have them do small things that make them feel like they're doing something about it, that might be nice, but to me that doesn't really answer it. It's a really good question because I think the parent cares about whether it be what religion I'd like my child to have, or for me it was wanting my children to read, be good readers, and this is a value. I think the best thing for parents to do is be that way themselves. I don't think we can teach someone else what to believe. If you teach someone too much, what to believe. If you portray the belief yourself as an adult and show the values you have as a person in your actions and how you interact with the world, children are, they absorb and internalize a lot of these things. I think that's the best way rather than try to inculcate, be it yourself, be authentically that way yourself. I think they would do the most successful way. If there were adults to do these things that adults can do, it's not the best way. And the children are participating in that family. If I could just ask you to bear with me one more second. You talked about hot cognition and cold cognition. Let's say you've inculcated these values, moral courage, standing up for things you believe in, working with other people, etc. Are there particular things that help people in moments of hot cognition keep their heads, particular psychological skills? Interesting. One of the ones that was, it's a great question, and one of the things that was alluded to earlier was executive function, which is this ability to stop and think, inhibit an action that you were maybe just going to reach out, right? And stopping and thinking about the consequences of your action and reflecting on that action. And although famously, adolescence is the period of time during which we quote, develop executive function, those skills are developing beginning in infancy, deferring gratification, right? Being able to wait a minute to get a bigger treat as opposed to taking a small treat immediately. That's developing very early on, and that's a very powerful cognitive skill that applies in social situations, in cognitive situations, in school settings, in all kinds of interpersonal situations. And that ability is something that we can help children develop and appreciate, and to be more reflective. And that may be something that works even in these hot cognition domains, absolutely. Just going back to your comment, I think this is an area where I would like to stop and think. I say, part of me wants to say yes, you're right, that childhood is a kind of protected space, and the adults may have created for future generations shouldn't weigh too heavily upon them. But part of me also wants to say that, you know, maybe we could sometimes underestimate children that way. You can educate their thinking about the long-term future, and indeed the deep past. We don't need to assume that they live, so to speak, in the here and now, all the time. I think we would underestimate them. But I'm torn, because I can see that it could be burdensome. But in some ways it could also be liberating if one were to give children the sense that, you know, we're part of a species. We put it this way. Children growing up in the United States will be exposed to a considerable amount of American history. And it's not a very comprehensive history at that. It's mostly a history of heroism. Well, you could argue that a broader picture, both looking backwards and looking forwards, would actually be more valuable than that particular curriculum. So, anyway, all that to say, I have some sympathy with the idea that we might think about just how much we could expand the child's horizon temporally. I think a lot of that's already being done. I mean, if you, I don't think that American history now is just about heroism and about how we are always saving the world and better than everyone else. In the schools my kids have gone to. They're taught that when Columbus discovered America, it wasn't such a good thing for the people here. And there's a lot of discussion about that. And I think it's the same thing with climate change. You know, my father in the United States, the world wasn't a kid. He grew up in the 1930s, right? There have always been terrible problems. And we try to teach kids what they're ready to absorb. It has to be different at every stage of development. So I think the easiest thing is to live what you believe in and kids will pick up what they can. But every child is going to have to deal with sex sooner or later. And we don't teach them, we don't give sex education in kindergarten. And we don't wait until they're in high school. And they're taught at their own capacity to take in what they can take in. And I think it's whether it's sex or racism or the nuclear threat or how to do this. You know, kids have to learn at a certain age. The reason I say how to pay your taxes is because I had a kid come in and his chief complaint was he was something like seven or eight years old. And he didn't know how to drive a car or pay his taxes yet. And the idea that that can come later, that he shouldn't worry that he doesn't know how to do it now, was foreign to him. So I don't think we should be scaring kids with things that they are not ready to absorb. But that doesn't mean we can't adjust what we talk about to where they are cognitively and emotional. I think the circle is back to the origins of our discussion about storytelling because it's in the storytelling of the childhood stories. That children gain a capacity for trial action and understanding the world. When you were talking about Stuart Little, I was thinking back to my encounter with it and how much it meant to me when I was a little boy that he was this little mouse who couldn't be like a big adult and yet was able eventually to go out into the world in his toy car. And this is what stories for children help them come to a future. So I don't know that we necessarily have to be doctrinaire about the kinds of stories, but if we tell enough stories, it covers a lot of ground in anticipation of the stories. Whether you try to tell them or not, they will form, everything can become a story. When you were talking about stories without words, the cartoons without words, I think probably most of you know this very beautiful wordless video for very young children called the snowman that a child of one and a half can already fully appreciate. And the other thing is the historical thing about reading and writing and worries about memory. Of course, people were worried about it and rightfully worried. I mean, I think it's been shown, or at least I've read, that in non-literate cultures, people do have much better memories. Anyway, my question is really to you about amnesia. Some of you talked about amnesia in the first two years of life and it could be even longer. But is it full amnesia? Are you talking about event memory or representational memory or are you talking about emotional memory? Well, that's a very interesting question because we don't have amnesia for everything in the first years of our lives. We learn to talk, we learn to walk, we learn to recognize our caregivers. We remember a great deal from the early years of life. What characterizes the prototypical case of childhood amnesia or infantile amnesia is that we do not have any memories of ourselves of personally relevant or significant events. And the way it's been defined in the literature is unfortunate in many respects because the question will be an event that happened at one time in one place that you can absolutely identify the age at which that event occurred. And of course, for most of us, our lives are repetitive. We don't have singular events, unique events every day. And in fact, a lot of us, if we reflect on our autobiographies, who we are, what made us, who we are. It's those Sunday dinner at grandmas, right? Every summer, my family took a vacation. It's not the one-time event. It's the fabric of our lives are these repeated events with the same people over and over. I actually think autobiographical memories of this kind of odd man out, but yet that's where a lot of the literature has focused. And when we talk about childhood amnesia, that's really what people are talking about. One thing that comes to mind is I witnessed this once a child who was separated from a nanny at the age of one after a very long lapse of time when the nanny returned, not only recognized the nanny, but pushed his mother away to be with a nanny. So that's a very strong emotional memory, and that was formed by the age of one. Right? It's interesting that this childhood amnesia is very, very well documented phenomenon. In an audience of this size, we absolutely would replicate the finding that the average age of earliest memory is between three and four. What we would also replicate is that at least one person would have an event from at least the second year of life, and at least one person would say, my ear is not until I'm eight or nine years old. So we have this enormous individual difference, and I think it's one of the few areas in which we have such a pronounced individual difference. Is it related to the age at which language, you know, which language develops? You know, thus far not proven to be the case, and I think that's because language always, if you're typically developing child language develops between one and three years of age. So there's not enough variability. It is related to a lot of interesting things. It's related to birth status. Individuals who were first born tend to have earliest memories. Women tend to have memories from earlier in life than men is another. Cultural differences. Western cultures, we tend to have memories from earlier in life than Eastern cultures. So they're all kinds of really interesting individual differences. I have a daughter who, my daughter was started speaking with a little bit of an impediment, and you couldn't understand anything she says. She says she remembers this, trying to communicate. It's so interesting. It was obviously something that happened more than once, right? You know, that was an ongoing event, ongoing struggle for her. Yeah, that's really interesting. It wasn't, it was language, but it wasn't our language. But it's not your language. Yeah, that's really interesting. You've given me a lot of ideas, a lot of questions, including what is memory, which you asked, and then you left, it's like, what is memory? Thank you for mentioning this, the alumni research. My mom got a birthday card. It was eight panels. There's a little baby girl on a birthday hat. The next one, she's a little girl in a birthday hat. Then she's a teenager in a birthday hat. She's a young adult in a birthday hat, and an adult in a birthday hat. She's a woman in a birthday hat. She's a senior. Then she's old. And the last panel says, well, that sucked. You made me think that there might be a reason to make wordless stories for adults. Thank you. And just, this panel, it just reminded me of a lot of things. I can't say that I remember anything you said. I'm thinking about my own memory. If I call home and somebody else, I'll say, well, this one had rosy cheeks. He talked about Stuart Little. This guy didn't tell us the joke. He didn't tell us the other jokes. She had a scarf. He had a warm voice. He's the illustrator. It's all being videoed. You'll be fine. You don't have to remember it. I'm just talking about the limits of my own memory. I'm staring at this orange chair. I'm going to close my eyes. I don't have any orange chair in my mind. And maybe you do. You're an illustrator. It just makes me wonder what memories are. When you talk about the stories that people tell, I think that they do preserve our lives. But I also think they pick our lives. People tell the stories in the same way. And maybe it happened differently, or there's some other part of it that you didn't see. And then you keep hearing the story the same way. And I think it might obliterate some of the truth of what happened. And so when kids are telling, when kids are closing their eyes, or when kids are remembering things, or when kids are thinking things, that's tremendously exciting. And I don't spend a lot of time around kids. But what I know about kids is that their minds are near adult minds a lot. It's not that the kids just have their life. And I wish that as a kid, other people, I think you said, to take advantage of the way a kid thinks, and the way a kid's mind works, rather than trying to make it work a different way to be in school. I would have said, if I had been in school and anybody had been trying to teach me something, and I've been able to sit on a bouncy ball and learn it, that I could have learned it better because I am. Or with music, or with dancing, or with play acting, or improvisation. And I just hope that there are opportunities for, you know, we're not just studying kids' minds, but they were open to the magnificence of what's possible, and not just trying to train it up to be something smaller and more uniform. Thank you. Thank you. I love the little description that stories can pickle people's lives. Yes. It's great. Hi. So I have to, what I hope to be, concise questions for you. The first question is in terms of amnesia of autobiographical memory, is there any evidence that that manifests in dreams? In dreams. I personally just find that sometimes I have dreams of, you know, sort of, you know, what I could see very conceivably, you know, being in the body of an infant, and, you know, and sort of operating paradigm. And so that's question number one. And question number two is in terms of, you were talking about the internal expression, you were talking about the interpretation of facial expression, and I wonder about the other side of that. Is there any research in, you know, it essentially does a deficiency in the ability to make facial expression exist, and if not, if that's considered to be sort of an innately human thing, then what are the implications for that, for communication, for the development of communication? Yeah. I don't know. I don't know if our experts are here. Well, in terms of amnesia, I mean, I'm thinking that, you know, what Pat already, Patricia already said was that we do retain certain aspects of memory. It may not be specific events in time, but it could be things like just your sense of your body. And I could imagine something like that, that you could retain something like that. So I think, and if they're in the dreams, how are we? You know, that's, that's my, you know, the, I think dreams are very, very significant, but I think of them more in terms of being what it means to you about the dream rather than it being a representation or replica of something that literally happened. So my question is sort of the distinction between being able to sort of call upon at will narrative of something that's happened as opposed to having that be embedded sort of implicitly in the subconscious in a way that would manifest in a dream, but not in real life. I actually think that is what this, what Patricia was trying to distinguish between this exotic, explicit kind of memory versus more implicit forms of memory that have more to do with emotion and behavior and nonverbal experience. I'd also say a dream is, is just a thought you have when you're asleep. And it's, it's not, you know, people throughout history, starting certainly with the Bible and Joseph, have liked to believe that, that dreams are special communications. And what makes dreams different from ordinary daydreams or thoughts that you have or fantasies that you have is that you're asleep when you have them. So the kind of thinking that you do when you're asleep is different from the kind of thinking you do when you're awake. It's more visual. Things don't always make sense. Things happen that aren't real. And all of those things can happen in a daydream too, but you're pretty clear that that's going on while you're doing it. So I think we have no way of knowing if you dream something in which you're imagining yourself as a child, whether that's because that's a real memory of when you were a child, or whether you're having a fantasy of what I wish my childhood had been like or, thank God my childhood wasn't like what I'm just thinking about right now. I mean, dreams have motives to them, but I don't think we should ever assume that we know in advance what the mechanism is. Any more than we would, you know, if you're just sitting by yourself bored and having a daydream, it doesn't necessarily, you don't know where it comes from, just by that. Did that answer both of your questions? My second question was about does a deficiency in the formation of facial expressions exist and if it doesn't, it does. I think so. There's a condition, a condition. I mean, everything's on a spectrum. Like Patricia was saying, everything's on a bell-shaped curve. Normal is, you know, a wide range. But yes, I think there are people who are not as much in tune with their emotional life, and I think it's reflected in they have less affective expression in their faces, yes. I think there are people like that. I think I've seen them. And just that then manifest and also sort of mirror-neuron problems, like, you know, they cannot manifest expressions to mirror other people, therefore they have, you know, less of a conception of what others are. I don't think anyone has actually studied that, but one of the, you know, we're, a lot of what we have to understand about ourselves as people is the impact we have on other people. So if someone is not expressing very much, they're going to have a different impact on someone else than if they're very expressive. And unless they know that, life will be very confusing. And so, whereas someone who's very expressive, like me, you know, has a different impact, and sometimes it's a little too much for people, and I have to, you know, contain myself. And so I have to know about that impact. And so it's just the range, and I think it's... But I'm nervous about assuming that somebody who is not so expressive lacks some inner emotional life. I mean, the British are worried about that. Yeah. There you go. I say that. I say that. I see people who are not in touch, are maybe less expressive on their face. I think they demonstrate, not always. I mean, they have different... No, but I'm entertaining. She asked if there's a category of people, and I think there is a category. I mean, that is a broad generalization. Yeah, but I'm just entertaining the thought that there could be a certain type of person who's deeply in touch with their emotional life, but for whatever reason, masks it. They've been... Yes. So much irony. Well... Yes. Well, I think, you know, one of the things that I understand about children is, and that is unique to the human species unlike other animals, is we are raised to......with the social, cultural norms of the society we're raised in, which means you can take a child born in Russia, you know, carry them to... You know, Patagonia, and they're going to do just fine, because the way of life is something you learn from the adults around you. And so, if you grew up in Britain, you're perfectly well socialized to behave in a particular way that to a New Yorker would seem, you know, cold. Right, but it isn't. You said it. My husband's from Iowa, and I'm from New York, and I live in Los Angeles, and when he first came to New York, he said, Oh, now I get it. Everyone yells at each other. He thought it was just me. But there's something of an emotional two-way street, isn't there? If you spend your day smiling, just the fact that your smile muscles are turned on does have......I mean, from what I've read, not that I do it, but, you know... So I presume that if your muscles don't work and your face won't express, maybe you would have a harder time emotionally feeling the things that you would otherwise. But... Okay. Two observations from the talk that I wonder if you guys would comment on. The first is essentially, I guess you've been talking about declarative memory, and have not really been that explicit about that during the discussion. Okay, okay. And declarative memory is about conscious recollection, as opposed to all the other kinds of memory which have been kind of mixed in, having to do with skill, acquisition, stuff like that, which is not necessarily conscious. And consciousness is very selective, you know, so for the most part, consciousness serves......in terms of expectation, and when we see situations which are beyond our expectation, we switch from our habit system to a more conscious system, because we're attempting to adjust our model to these surprising circumstances and update our model and integrate this new experience. So I wonder if maybe you guys could comment on that. The other issue was the thing about hot and cold cognition. And so there were some interesting discussions about how adolescents don't switch that on. And so, you know, I always recall this 12-year-old that sat next to me in a bus, and she said, excuse me sir, this seat is not taken. And she spoke to me like an adult. And I just had to ask her a whole bunch of questions. And she lived in a cattle ranch in Northern California, where she had learned to ride when she was seven, and she had her own horses. Her father took her out hunting. She learned how to shoot a gun by the age of nine. She was a sharpshooter. And she told me about one time when she had to stay in the woods, because a cougar was circling around, and she climbed a tree and fell asleep. And what I'm trying to say is that, you know, there hasn't been much of a discussion of other cultures. And other cultures have a lot of demands. And when we were, you know, a couple hundred years ago, you know, by the time you were 12 or 14, you had a lot of expectations put on you. And your brain had done that flip from being mostly, you know, reflexive and imitative to starting to be more prefrontal and being able to, you know, adjust to those expectations and demands. So cultural issues as well as biological issues work together in turning those systems on. And I wonder if you might comment on those things. That's a great observation, of course. You know, those of us who study brain development, we often, we do it from a brain-centric perspective, right? We talk about the impact of brain development on behavior. But of course, the environment and behavior impact brain development. So your observation about, you know, over evolutionary time, it's entirely likely that we have somewhat slowed down the development of the maturation and the development of the prefrontal cortex, because we aren't making those demands on our adolescence. We have this extended period of adolescence. So it's not a, you know, it's not a coincidence. But it does work both ways, and you're absolutely right to point that out. That we can't just talk about brain development and its impact on behavior. We also have to think about the demands and the situations in which the individual and the culture, right, places the individuals, and that does impact the extent to which, or the speed at which, and the extent to which we are seeing development. So that's an excellent observation. The issue of declarative, or the explicit conscious memory, that's what we can bring into the laboratory. That's what we can bring into the session, except through other probing techniques that you can study. But certainly from the standpoint of laboratory science, that's the focus. And when we think about autobiographical or personal memories, we find in terms of these consciously accessible memories. So the category is limited to that 5% of our lives that we spent being consciously aware. Most of our behavior is determined outside of our awareness. So they're both very good observations. Though for people in my world, almost everything we're studying is things that people are not consciously aware of. So you use language all the time, you're not conscious how you're doing it. And it's almost, declarative is the last thing we deal with. Okay, well, one more. On two things that I recall reading somewhere. One was something in one of the Malcolm Gladwell books about, I think a fellow by the name of Erickson, who had categorized all the muscles in the face to talk about their, what they were thinking emotionally. And in fact, I remember one thing that he said in there was when I think Erickson, or whoever it was, was watching the Democratic Convention and he saw Clinton and he said, PEC's bad boy, just from the muscular expressions. So I wonder if you could comment about that. And secondly, something I remember reading a long time ago, sometimes where we can't articulate a feeling, it might be something that we absorbed as an infant where we couldn't speak, but yet we still had that feeling. So either I'd like to hear. Eckert is the, is the, Eckman, thank you, Eckman, Paul Eckman. There we go, that's right, locally stupid units, right? We managed, Paul Eckman, it is an exquisite categorization scheme that is 277 points, I think, on the face. I don't know the scheme, so I've never labored to learn it, but absolutely where you can characterize every muscle in the face and those that are associated with positive expressions, negative expressions, and the like. So, and I won't comment about Clinton. He does, I mean, just a cautious word about Eckman. He's, in part, sold this research as a way of analyzing the extent to which people are misleading you. And so the security agencies in the United States, for example, have funded quite a lot of his research on the grounds that it will help them figure out who is telling the truth and who is lying. And I think a psychologist, experimental psychologist, would be much more nervous about the claim that he tends to make, which is that he can distinguish truth tellers from liars. It turns out to be very difficult, he claims a certain success, but anyway, I just want to insert a question mark there. Into that, yeah, absolutely. Our last question. My question is about like the stories that children are told, like, and especially like fairy tales. I mean, it seems to me that like, you know, the Walt Disney version of say Snow White or Cinderella is very different from like the Grimm's fairy tales, you know, and how that kind of affects. Even like in the story of like Cinderella, well now you have like a more feminist kind of perspective on what like, you know, sits in the well or Snow White is, so how kind of cultural evolves. I guess I should respond to this. Well, for one thing, a very pragmatic thing is the Walt Disney movies take what, forty-five minutes or an hour and a half or something, and a fairy tale you read in five minutes. So they add a lot of things, but clearly there's a lot of values being looked at and thought about and taught and commercial values, especially I think in the case of Hollywood studios. So the fairy tales are not necessarily really the ways to plumb the depths of the social mind that the Grimm's brothers and the other claimed because there's a lot of actual literary content to those by, you know, by artists, writers who are writing things, but it's a matter of different values basically. I prefer the Grimm's and a lot of people prefer. I was under the impression that those fairy tales were not necessarily specifically for children when they were originally. No, they were collect. And I sort of believe it is that the Grimm brothers were involved in the program to collect stories that would define the German nationality and create a German culture that didn't really exist as one thing, and that was what they were also linguists creating a German addiction area of etymology. So this was kind of the same thing in terms of stories, and that was what they were doing. But as soon as it came out in 1815, they published their first collection, and people all over the place bought it and gave it to their children. And they had to go back and sort of rewrite their preface. Things changed. They started changing the way they told the stories, and even they as they went on through the years reviewing and making different editions, they changed the stories to make them, in their case, they made them more appropriate for children as they saw it because they got more vicious, and the punishments were worse, and simpler in the morality that they were telling. Because there were a lot of things in the first edition that were very morally weird and funny and great in a ways, because they got them in some cases straight from the storytellers who were having a good time. So, okay, well, please join me in thanking our participants for providing such a fascinating discussion today. It was a great note. You hear a low noise or a white? No. No.