 Coming. I guess you know we're the amygdalaids and we play music about mind and brain and mental disorders. So it's fitting that we're in this particular place tonight. And the program is we're going to play a few songs and play about 45 minutes, 50 minutes or so. But before each sort of suite of songs, which would be one or two songs together on a particular topic, I'll just give you a brief kind of background about the intellectual background of the topic, the historical kind of place that the ideas come from, that the song is sort of based upon. And we're going to start off with a couple of songs about one of the deep problems in psychology, philosophy, neuroscience, psychiatry, all of the things that we know and care about, which is the mind-body problem. And you know this goes back to the ancient Greeks. We have ideas from the article at Delphi, for example, that the article said know thyself and a couple of millennia later, Descartes tried to solve this problem by concluding that the only thing he could know was himself with certainty. But you know this becomes, with Freud this becomes more questionable because then we have some issues about how much of what we are is conscious and how much is unconscious. So a couple of themes will be explored tonight through the music is consciousness and unconsciousness and the automaticity of certain aspects of who we are. And we're going to start with a couple of songs that are more in the area of consciousness, in particular with the first one is sort of a tribute to Descartes and he goes like this. I think so I am, I feel so I must be, sometimes I don't know, but it is to be me, I see your eyes, and they're staring at me, they're sharp as knives, oh what do we see, you can't see, you can't see inside of me, inside of me there's a blade only I can be. My soul has passion, it's trying to feel, searching for desire, nothing is real, my will is weak, it's not very free, nothing to get hung about, oh that's just the deal, you can't see inside of me, inside of me, that's a place only I can be, you can't see inside of me, inside of me that's a place only I can be. I think so I am, I feel so I must be, sometimes I don't know, it's to be me, I think so I am, I feel so I must be, sometimes I don't know, but it is to be me, you can't see, you can't see inside of me, inside of me there's a blade only I can be, it only I can't be only I can beson All right, thank you very much. Tyler, you'd say something for a minute while I switch guitars. Well, about the mind-body problem. Yes, what's the next song, Joe? I forgot. Mind-over matter. Oh, mind-over matter. So, yeah, yeah, we have to, well, of course, in culture, we think we have a lot of control over matter, and we do in a certain sort of way. But there's always a longing for more and more transcendence, and so we think of ourselves as immaterial beings as the same times that were materially embodied. And so this next song is a little bit about the, that kind of conflict between the material and the immaterial. Yeah, and it's about the, you know, the longing that you can have for someone who's not here and sort of delude yourself into thinking you can overcome space and time and bring that person together with you. Mind-over matter. There's something I'm trying to do. I guess it's only physics that keeps me apart from you. Mind-over matter. Something I'm trying to do. Break down space and time. Be together with you. I'm trying to will you here. Mind you wherever you are. Locate your body or soul. Pull you in from afar. Are you still in my time? Have you slipped away? Have you gone forward to back living in another day? Where am I to be? Different continent around the sea. In the air, flying free. In a place, heavenly. No mound of space or time can keep you from being mine. I'm trying to keep you from being mine. Mind-over matter. There's something I'm trying to do. I guess it's only physics that keeps me apart from you. Mind-over matter. Something I'm trying to do. Break down space and time. Be together with you. Be together with you. Thank you. Now we're going to switch gears to the unconscious mind. We're going to do a couple of songs about how we aren't always quite aware of what's driving our behavior. There's a lot of stuff deep below the surface. The mind is below the tip of the iceberg. This is a song by Tyler called the automatic mind. The song is about the way the mind travels by itself on its own journey. You can not have any particular stimulus. You could be meditating in one of the main lessons. The first insight is about meditation. This is an ongoing meditation for me. The song is called the automatic mind. I still have to write beyond the automatic mind one of these years. Right now it's the automatic mind. It's got an interesting base part here. When you get there you'll write the song. Beyond. I get there. Okay. Welcome to the automatic mind. The door is open to remembered time. Images are conjured like a dream. Guiding actions on the waking screen. Even though I realize it's still I feel so blind. As I think about and can't live without the automatic mind. We live in the automatic mind. Introspection opens in her eyes. It seems advanced yet hardly in control. Illusion of the will is comfort cold. Even though I realize it's still I feel so blind. As I think about and can't live without the automatic mind. Walk. Talk. Drink. Think. Think. Think. Think. Think. So You I realize it's still I feel so blind as I think about and can't live without automatic mind All right, so let me just take that opportunity to introduce Tyler Tyler as a Professor of Environmental Sciences and biology at NYU and he works on Atmospheric and issues and carbon and things like that anything else you want to add about that? That's good Joe. Okay Daniela Schiller is a Assistant professor at Mount Sinai. She's a cognitive neuroscientist and she studies recovery from fear and processes in the brain that Allow people to get over fears through various ways anything else And she's also an award-winning storyteller for the moth organization and other places Amanda Thorpe is a world-famous international musician She hails from Derby, England Darby, I guess it's a doggy And we're very fortunate to have her with us and although she's not technically a scientist She does have a background in neuropsychology from University College London. So we count her as a part of the team Okay, and under the lamp, but she's a fabulous musician with a separate solo career all together With a bunch of CDs you can find her online at demandathorp.com, right? Okay, I'm Joe LaDue and I'm a professor of neuroscience at NYU and now we're gonna do a song called My Mind's up So my mind's eye is another one about the the way the mind plays tricks on us and does things that We don't always know too much about and if I can remember where this thing goes this time we're being good shit Okay, so take it away I can't think If you look into my mind's eye You would see the way that I cry Deep inside in my mind's eye We had love it was good You are there you understood Everything Yes, everything You can't always trust what you think you know can't trust what you believe Sometimes your mind just puts on a show It's simply disease My mind's eye you were mine my mind's eye was fine If you look into my mind's eye You would see the way that I cry Deep inside in my mind's eye You can't always trust what you think you know can't trust what you believe Sometimes your mind just puts on a show it's simply disease You My mind's eye you were mine my mind's I was blind My mind's I was blind My mind's I was blind Oh, yeah, my mind's I was blind Thank you Okay Yeah, map your mind so we have automatic mind and my mind's eyes like part of the the problems with our psyches and But there's also a lot of joy being a human being as well Which I hope we're all smiling about every minute of the day. So this is actually some of our favorite song. It's by Joe It's called map of your mind. Okay, here we go Made a map of your mind I've charted my course I'm sailing deep inside Got the winds of force got the heat of your heart keep you from the cold Got the currents of will take me to your soul I'm on a journey Out of God It's a boy Had I knew I And excursion Of the inside It's a trip fuel by fire Made a map of your mind I charted my course Tailing deep inside I've got the winds of force got the heat of your heart Keep me from the cold got the currents of will Take me to your soul I'm just hoping I'll say it will be true That they'll take me straight to you Let the winds blow from the sweet Joe and I land My minds will meet Got the heat of your heart Keep me from the cold Got the currents of will Take me to your soul Made a map of your mind Take me to your soul Made a map of your mind Take me to your soul To your soul To your soul To your soul All right, thank you Now we have a song called Trace, which is something that people here have studied Of traces of memories, how they leave permanent records in the neurons and now the DNA and the neurotransmitters From having the memory, it's really there So it's a connection between our daily lives and the discoveries about the neurological systems of our brains The song is called Trace We're moving now into the memory part of the show, so we do a couple songs about memory You left a trace in my memory A permanent place in my synoptics Say the time feels all pain The time can't erase your place in my brain Days and nights they were so fine Months and years, maybe sublime Time stood still, while it flew on by Time ended when you said goodbye You left a trace in my memory A permanent place in my synoptics Say the time feels all pain Time can't erase your place in my brain Time can't erase your place in my memory You're a dominant trace, you won't erase your a dominant trace You won't erase your a dominant trace, you won't erase your a dominant trace You'll never be a ray Okay, thank you For those who are sort of neuroscience aficionados That song was written over a dinner with Richard Morris and Yadine Doudai Which Richard challenged me to write a song about Yadine's theory of the dominant trace Just in case you know what that means The next song is back to the other guitar, it's glue This is another song about memory It's about glue and the way that emotions can glue together your memories and make them stronger You probably noticed that most of our neuroscience songs are love songs That's the way we kind of tell the story of the brain We got us this on We can go behind you Turn that off for a second Shisha's a good scientist I saw you leaving, you saw me too You smiled at me, that's what you do I tried to follow, but you were gone Now I'm waiting, sitting home alone Keep thinking about your smile and eyes Can't believe your words were lies You made me happy, so very glad I can't forget those times we had There must be something in my brain There must be something in my veins There must be something in my brain That keeps my memories stuck on you I saw you go, I didn't know But you'd be there in the week or so It's so hard to realize in that I wasn't really aware you're right I dream about you, most every night I dream you're there, everything's alright I keep hoping, my dreams will come true But I'll wake up, right next to you There must be something in my brain There must be something in my veins There must be some crime over That keeps my memories stuck on you I keep thinking about your smile and eyes Can't believe your words were lies You made me happy, so very glad I can't forget those times we had There must be something in my brain There must be something in my veins There must be some crime over That keeps my memories stuck on you That keeps my memories stuck on you Alright now, so we've done memory and the mind body problem The unconscious, and now returning to fear We'll do a couple songs about that We'll play a couple more songs We'll play a couple more songs We'll play a couple more songs When the night is dark When the night is dark I lose my fear When the night is dark Never shed a tear, then the daylight comes It scares me away, the daylight comes And I have to fake When the night is dark Night is dark I feel so free When the night is dark I feel the peace, then the daylight comes It scares me away, the daylight comes It scares me away, the daylight comes It scares me away Night is dark When the night is dark I come alive When the night is dark I begin to thrive When the daylight comes It scares me away, the daylight comes The daylight comes When the night comes When the daylight comes It scares me away When the daylight comes When the night is dark I begin to thrive We're going to close things out here with a song That ends where we started, it's called the mind body problem And we're going to just solve that problem right here now Alright, ready for a little blues I've got a mind body problem I don't know what to do I've got a problem I don't know what to do My body won't you sew My mind says no You said you'd always love me To me it'd be true You said you'd love me To me it'd be true Well now you're gone I'm sad and blue Well now you're back You want me again Now you're back You want me again If I relent I lose in the end I've got a mind body problem I don't know what to do I've got a problem I don't know what to do My body won't you sew My mind says no I don't know what to do I don't know what to do I don't know what to do I even tried religion Get over you I even tried religion To get over you My body's not you sew Oh, oh, oh I've got a mind I've got a mind I can't get over I can't get over I can't get over Oh, oh, oh, oh I'm going insane I've got a mind body problem I don't know what to do I've got a problem I don't know what to do My body won't you sew My mind says no I'm going insane I'm going insane