 Sorry that you have to do that. What is the, you're doing the Oxford Handbook as well, right? Sort of the, I'm in the last box or a handbook. Okay, we're going to get started. Welcome everybody. I'm Rob Penzer. I'm the Associate Director of the Heel Center. I'm currently Blackwell. Just a reminder, please turn off your cell phones as we are live streaming this event and active phones will interfere with that. A few announcements of upcoming round tables on Saturday, October 24th. We have the Realm of Mystery with Columbia University Professor of Philosophy, Carol Rovane, University of Chicago Professor of Theoretical Astrophysics, Michael Turner, University of California, Santa Barbara, Professor of Jewish Studies, Elliot Wolfson, and Princeton Professor of English, Susan Wolfson. Then on Saturday, November 7th, our program is Speak Memory with NYU Professor of Neuroscience, Christina Alvarini, UC Irvine Professor of Philosophy, Sven Bernicker, NYU Professor of Neuroscience, Tom Karu, City University London Professor of Cognitive Psychology, Martin Conway, and University of Manchester Senior Lecturer of Neuroscience, Penelope Lewis. Then on Saturday, November 21st, we have Translation Matters with Princeton Professor French and Comparative Literature, David Bellos, Sarah Lawrence Professor of Comparative Literature, Bella Bradsky, UC Santa Barbara Director of Translation Studies, Suzanne Gillavigne, Author and Metropolitan Museum of Art Director of Publications Program, Mark Polizotti, and SUNY New Paul's Associate Professor of English, Michelle Woods. In collaboration with the French Multidisciplinary Think Tank, the association is Ami de Passage. Keelix will be holding a three-day symposium on December 4th, 5th, and 6th, called A Freudian Perspective on What Bails the World Today, featuring an international roster of scholars addressing issues of education, identity, nationalism, and fundamentalism. And now for today's program Understanding Genius, when I announce your name, please raise your hand just so the audience will recognize you. Steve Hsu is Vice President for Research and Professor of Theoretical Physics at Michigan State University. Rex Young, Assistant Professor of Neurosurgery at the University of New Mexico. Darren McMahon, Mary Brimsmeade Wheelock Professor of History at Dartmouth College. Dean Keith Simonton, Distinguished Professor of Psychology at the University of California, Davis. Unfortunately, Joanne Ruth Sats from Ohio State, who was scheduled to be here, was unable to join us because of the inclement weather which canceled her flight. So we'll begin now. How do we begin? Genius just emerged just like that. Well, that is a long-running theory that genius is spontaneous. And I think that researchers here would probably argue that's not the case, that genius often takes a lot of work. That Edison, when he said that genius is 99 percent perspiration and 1 percent imping inspiration was more on to truth. And yet it's interesting that we seem to like that idea, the idea of the apple falling and Newton just discovering the law of gravity like that even though we know he worked 18 hour a day. In fact, when Newton was asked, how do you come up with all these great ideas? He just says, I ponder a lot. And it's not just the amount of work they put in, thinking over and over and over again about whatever obsesses them, but they make a tremendous amount of mistakes along the way. You know, there's all these fault starts because a lot of times you don't see it because either it's not published or if it's art, it ends up in the basement in storage or some of the kind of things. So it's filtered. But even in Albert Einstein, who's like a prototype, all these horrendous errors, particularly in developing this unified, yeah, unified field theory. There was a good book that was out a couple of years ago called Einstein's Mistakes. And it's about just this, the creative errors that one makes on the way to truth. And you have to do it. And he even justified it. He says mistakes and signs are okay as long as they're big enough. I'll tell your students that. I think it's worth clarifying that humans like narrative and simple stories. And so often we attach achievement or results to an individual when in fact there are quite a few people who contributed. So it's, I think that is not to say that I don't believe that there are geniuses in the world. There certainly are. But the true story is almost undoubtedly more complicated than the one that we're familiar with. All right. And it's even true for someone like Albert Einstein. At the very beginning, when he was a nobody, he used his first wife as kind of a sounding board for a lot of his ideas. And some people even say that she probably contributed more in particular to special theory relativity than she got credit for. They made a deal when they got divorced that he would get the award and she would get the money. And a lot of people realize that later on, he's like, oh, I'm sorry. He got in over his head mathematically. And so had to take on mathematical collaborators, he wouldn't have been able to develop his later theories. And later on when he was working on his general relativity, he got into a kind of a contest with an distinguished mathematician, Pong Karate. And it was really kind of close for a while because he didn't have the mathematical ability to do what he needed to do. And something we said about the differentiation between collaboration and inspiration and and the subsequent aspiration of I'm thinking of, you know, fifth century Athens or Elizabethan England, or Renaissance Florence where it didn't necessarily have, I mean, there were some collaborations but the emergence of these geniuses on multiple fronts. that there's something also about the inspiration? I think there are special moments in history where either the cultural background is particularly conducive to some kind of breakthrough, or in the case of science, what is often the case is you have theoreticians who have ideas, but the experimental technology is not there to test those ideas. So for example, today we have a lot of people working on things like string theory, which are, to this moment, actually completely untested by experiment. And it may turn out when we look back 1,000 years from now, we may say, hey, these guys were geniuses, and they developed a full theory of quantum gravity with no experimental input. Or it might be 1,000 years from now, people look back and have completely forgotten about string theory. Einstein was lucky because his theories were tested very soon after he made them. And they were both conceptually deep and broad breakthroughs, but they were also verified as true very soon afterward. And that's why he has become such a singular history, a singular figure in the history of genius. They were verified and publicized too, and I think that's critical. It's in 1917, 12 years after the Anis Morabulous of 1905. Right, Stissen. Why are there five of us? It seems to me as we go down. All right. Man. Thank you. And the voice. OK. It's 12 years after he's done his major work, and yet it's publicly announced and verified. And it's then in 1917 when he becomes this kind of world saint, really, all over the world. And he's the only genius that we really have access to his brain. So that's not true. Well, we start harvesting brains in the 19th century, and there are all kinds of bits and pieces of geniuses. It's been bones and even a penises. It's been studied very deliberately, I guess. So we've had bits and pieces of Einstein's brain, and people are very fascinated with it. We have Lenin's brain, and other brains as well. But it's been studied and made slowly accessible. And people are fascinated by this brain. What is in this head that makes this individual so remarkable? And I was talking with a friend earlier, when they looked into his brain, it was rather unremarkable when they first looked at it. It was somewhat smaller than the average human brain even for a person his age until people started remarking on it and finding these unusual bits and pieces that were a bit different than other brains. I would have had lateral, exceptional lateral connectivity between left and right, or is that just, is that apocryphal? It's a bit apocryphal. I mean, they have one of the first studies they looked at his angular gyrus. And they started looking at the number of glial cells versus neurons in his angular gyrus. And Widdlson, I believe, found that there hired glial ratio to neuron ratio. They had a bit of his frontal lobe, his brain, I don't know if people know this, but his brain was cut up into little cubes. Soon after his death, he died of aortyl aneurysm. So his brain was relatively preserved from his untimely death and cut up his brain in little cubes and sent them around. He had a piece of his frontal cortex and a piece of his parietal cortex. And they took a look at it and they found that his frontal cortex wasn't particularly unusual in terms of neural-to-wheel ratio, but part of his angular gyrus was unusual. Parts of his corpus callosum are unusual in terms of its connectivity. People have looked at that. His motor cortex has a knob on it, which they have hypothesized is involved with his violin playing. But does this have anything to do with genius at all? You know, it's worth, I always like to point out that Einstein left explicit instructions in his will that in no part of his body would be left behind. And so it was taken without knowledge of that will, but against his will, by this a very amusing man who kept the brain in a beer cooler for a while and drove it in the back of his Pontiac around the country. But that kind of fascination with the body parts of genius actually has a long history, as I say. Or other saints for that matter, as you indicate. Exactly. And that in itself says something interesting that we want to put our fingers on the genius part. And frankly, I think it's a little silly. I mean, I don't know about the brain science here, but my understanding is that the effort to locate Einstein's genius in his brain is kind of just silly. Sometimes you end up with this thing like happened with the phrenologists. Because they were the, some people even say that modern cognitive science is the neo-phrenology. You're trying to find where and the brain genius is located or inside of the book or whatever. And way back in the early day of the phrenology, they analyzed it. Did Saint kind of postmortem. OK. Only it was easier. He didn't have to have the brain tissue. He just had to have the skull and the uro. And this guy, I forget who it was, the early phrenologists pointed out, it might actually think all. I don't know. Pointed out that the area of the cranium that is responsible for mathematical ability in Descartes was actually depressed instead of bumped out. And so they argued on the base of that negative evidence that his mathematical ability must be tremendously overestimated. It's not clear that what purports to be Descartes skull is even his skull that's returned to France and different privileges. So there is this fascination of trying to understand. I mean, so your intelligence, your creativity, all of these things arise in your brain, at least in part. So trying to understand the complexity of that relationship between brain and behavior is certainly a worthy endeavor. But looking at the corpus callosum or the motor strip or the angular gyrus is going to be fraught with a phrenological types of underpinnings. You're not talking at all about IQ. So you are separating genius from IQ? We could talk about IQ. Yeah. Yeah. Well, no, I just, I mean, one more that thought you would say, well, somebody who has an IQ of 100 and something or other is considered the genius. But you're not going there at all. I'll talk about that. Yeah. We can all do it. We can all do it. What? You might go, you might. I suspect we're using the term to mean someone who has achieved something great. And so there are many people who have high IQs who do not achieve great things. However, the probability that someone will achieve something great, I think, is monotonically increasing with IQ. And if you test eminent scientists, randomly selected eminent scientists, you will find that they tend to have very high IQs. But of course, nothing in human life is deterministic. So there are plenty of people who are seven feet tall and are not going to play in the NBA. But the fraction of seven footers in the US who play in the NBA is exceptionally high. I just say one thing. I teach the history of psychology, and I have a little section on this. It's really kind of upsetting to me what happened to the term genius. I mean, it was originally designed to refer to outstanding achievement. And then there was this guy at Stanford University named Lewis M. Turner, who decided he was going to do this massive longitudinal study of high IQ kids. That's obviously these kids were little kids, boys and girls. So you can't talk about outstanding achievement. And follow him all the way through adulthood. And he called this genetic studies of genius. Genic by weight can also mean developmental, not a study. You know, heredity. And termites. What? It's termites. It's termite. Yeah, it's termite. And the thing is, is that he had to pick an arbitrary selection criteria. So he picked 140. And if you look at a lot of dictionaries, like the Barrican Heritage Dictionary, they say a genius of someone who has an IQ of 140 or above. That was a totally arbitrary decision. It could have been 136 or 152 at 0.1. And in fact, none of the kids who passed the threshold of 141, the Nobel Prize, there were two physicists who just missed qualifying Shockley and Lewis Alvarez, who did win the Nobel Prize. Now, there's some claim that the test that was used was primarily verbally loaded. And these two were much stronger mathematically. And probably would have qualified had to use a slightly different kind of IQ test. But so a lot of people will use the fact that none of the termites won the Nobel Prize as evidence that IQ has nothing to do with achievement. But that is completely wrong, actually. It's also interesting that two of the termites grew up and ended up being professors at Stanford University. And they took over this longitudinal study that was still continuing. So they became subjects in their own. It reflects full interpretation. And Terman's study, I mean, it was incredibly flawed. He got involved with the two. He wrote letters for them. Yeah, he wrote letters of recommendation for them. So I mean, it was a horribly flawed study from that perspective as well. There's incredibly biased, experimental bias. There's a more modern variance of the Terman's study, which is still ongoing, called, there's two variants of it, SMPY and SVPY, study of mathematically or verbally precocious youth. And probably some of the children of people in this room are in the study. But if you score above a certain level by the age of 13, you're admitted to this study. And the oldest people in the study now, I think, are in their 50s. And so you can ask, well, as the IQ gets higher and higher, does the probability of some level of achievement increase? And so you can, for example, show that someone who's at the 1 in 10,000 level of ability is many times more likely to have a patent at age of 45 than someone who was only in the top 1%. So there's no diminishing returns to intelligence, even as you get to the 1 in 10,000 level of ability. Probability being tenured at a major research university, also monotonically increasing. So even within what we would consider already very high scores, top 1%, as you go from top 1% to top 1 in 10,000, there are significant differences in those populations. And the major thing about that study, unlike what happened in the terming one, is they actually got people who we would consider geniuses. For example, they have field's medalists. I don't think they have medalists. Terence Tau is in it. Yeah, good example of that. Absolutely outstanding. And also interesting, because one of the issues that sometimes arises when you talk about geniuses, mad geniuses, and Terence Tau is just totally normal guy. Well, if you met Terence, you would say he clearly is not a, he's a little bit on the aspect of his side. But for someone that smart, he is very normal. Yeah, I would put it that way. I should have called about it. Yeah. You know, you said we're talking about Q, but just to link up what we were talking about earlier, brain studies, cranial studies, IQ. When the IQ exam is developed in the 1890s in France by a man by the name of Paul B. A. And it's Lewis Turman, who takes that research and sort of instrumentalizes it. B. A was actually a very interested in cranial studies as well. And I see that IQ exam is kind of growing out of this long 90th century attempt to locate genius. And some of that research, I think, should give us real pause. It's not coincidental that Turman was an anti-Semite that he had unsaved reviews about race. He was an acolyte of Francis Galton, who was an important scientist, the nephew of Charles Darwin. His first book is entitled, Hereditary Genius, and who's very interested in how to identify genius in population pools, but who's also the father of eugenics as people in the room will know. So it's sort of just worth pointing out those connections, those long-fhelial connections. That's not to cast IQ out of the discussion by any means, but there's a dark history there, too. Yeah. Yeah. And even manifest in the Turman's study, because you mentioned Shockley. He really resented that he didn't have an IQ higher now. He spent the rest of his life resenting it. And basically stealing the transistor idea for some colleagues. I mean, I'm not sure he stole it, but he took more credit than with his teacher. But he got one up in the end, because he contributed to sperm to the Nobel Prize sperm bank. Right, right. Right. He'll have more more to say later. And he ended up doing in line with the tradition, going back to Galton, started arguing about superior and inferior races as well. Yeah. But I would say to some extent, we live in Galton and Turman's world today, even though we don't think about it anymore. So long ago, we would not have thought that we could use standardized tests to filter talent or to allow access to valuable educational resources. But this is exactly what we do in our society. So if you want to get into MIT, you have to do quite well in the standardized test, which are essentially IQ tests. And so American society is quite ordered, in some sense, along achievement lines on these exams. And if you go to places like Japan or China where admission to college is based on a single exam, again, you have a society that's actually filtering based on brain power and then allowing those people who have, above average, ability more access to educational resources. It's going to lead us meritocracy. Well, yeah. And it is interesting that the United States adopted use of these kind of standardized exams very quickly and took to it much more aggressively than other countries. In the front of Europe, say, that's something that American society has to say, a kind of elitist meritocracy. I don't disagree with you. But if you look at how admission to a cold normal superior or a cold polytechnic in France, it's even more elitist than what we have here. It's much more elitist. It's much more elitist. So in fact, it's not fair to tar Americans only with this brush. In Japan and China and Korea, same thing. There is a Gao Kao or high exam that you take when you leave high school. And if you do well in it, you go to Beijing University. And if you don't, then. Well, China has had the civil service. 1,000 years, 1,000 years. I'm talking about the type of exam. I mean, to get into the cold normal superior, you do the cany and you do a whole set of exams. It's not an exam that like IQ at all. It's based on content. All right. And that's a different method. And there's another interesting thing that happened to IQ is that the original conception of intelligence when Benet was working on it was actually much broader. He was looking at mental retardation. Yeah, exactly. He actually started looking at the lower end for special education. He was interested in artificial education. And also, the items were much broader. He was just looking at what are the kind of things that kids are able to do as they mature intellectually. And so I'm hoping who might need additional help to succeed in an educational environment. And then it got kind of inverted. It was actually term inverted because he went from studying people who were on a lower end to people on the upper end. And part of that also was narrowed because of the emphasis on increased reliability of the test. So what you do is to increase the reliability, you have to throw out the items to have lower correlations with the overall score. And guess what? When you throw out those items, they have to do with things like creativity and moral decision making or things that aren't part of intelligence, obviously. I think that's a very important point. So when you're measuring analytic ability or some kind of very well-defined intelligence, then it can roughly, crudely, be measured by these IQ tests. Things like creativity, ability to work well with other people, ability to inspire other people. Those have never been things that we've been able to measure to operationalize in a reliable way in tests. And therefore, they get de-emphasized in ours. I always disagree. So they're getting better with measures of creativity, creative achievement questionnaires, reliable and validated measure, and personality is getting much, much better at measuring particular personality variables. So IQ is the gold standard that they can measure better than height in the doctor's office, believe it or not. But it is an incredibly reliable and validated standard to shoot for, but creativity measures and personality measures are getting better. The problem with personality, so it is very difficult to cheat on an IQ test. Because to cheat, you'd have to be smart. But you can cheat on a personality test. Because I can imagine my sociopathic friend and say, I'll answer the way he would answer. I'll answer it right. I'll answer it pro-social ways so that I can get this job. So that's the problem with personality tests. Although I agree, they do have validity and reliability as well. If I can tell you how to cheat right now, the personality variable that correlates most strongly with creativity in a wide range of areas is the openness to experience. OK, so you already know how to answer all the questions. That's the time to ask you. Are you interested in trying to see all these people in this room are open to new experience, because they're here by definition. Guaranteed. Yeah, I want to go to poetry readings. Do I want to go see art? Do I want to try new food? That's the openness to experience. And yeah, it's easy to cheat on. But dig this, reinforce on it. IQ is a goal standard that I think will never be met, because it has been homogenized into what is measured. And it's interesting how a gardener came up with it. Well, initially, seven intelligence, but he's added some additional ones. And he's sometimes been criticized, because he says some of those intelligences don't really have measures for them. It's because they're creativity and personality. Yeah, like interpersonal intelligence. Intrapersonal intelligence. What's it, the somatic? Kneesthetic. Kneesthetic intelligence. Right. And they can't do it. Have something to do a layup and then give them a score. I mean, there's no. So is that really a criticism? But I think the criticism of gardener is usually not that his constructs exist. People agree that his constructs exist. The question is, can you operationalize it? Can you actually measure it in a reliable way? And on that question, the answer is no. You can't. And that's why you ended up going from kind of looking at it in the general population to focusing on genius. Yes. I create a achievement in creating minds. And then there's no question. So you started out with the question about intelligence and genius. But do you think creativity and personality variables are critical to the manifestation of genius? Well, yeah, that's the whole point. It's to me, it's not a single dimension. We can talk about g, you know, intelligence. It's been well demonstrated. It's very hard to get rid of it. So intelligence is likely necessary, but not sufficient to achieve genius. Yes. And that's why you talk about, yes. You have a monotonic line. But it's huge scatter right now. Exactly. These are all noisy predictors. And the reasoning why they're scattered is this person has a high openness experience. And this person has low openness experience. The person who has a highest recorded IQ, she took the Stanford Bine, when she was a little girl, and got her perfect score. She writes Marilyn Vosseva. Yeah, Marilyn Vosseva. Sure, it's an advice call. I mean, 226 is a really good IQ. No, no, no. She has book of records. But what is she doing? I hope she's not here. But it's a really good achievement that she's doing very well. She's drawing a column for a Sunday supplement. In which people ask dumb questions, that she answers. That she answers. I mean, a lot of them are really dumb. Like, why in winter should you wear dark clothing? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And she gives a very interesting number. That's not a dumb question. You look up by googling. So to me, she's sort of the prime example of having supreme IQ. She's basically a specialist in taking IQ tests. Sure. She's taking every IQ test you can possibly imagine, including one further. There's one for the four Sigma society. That's four standard deviations above of me. And I've seen some of the questions. And I'll admit it. I couldn't understand what they were asking. Dean, don't feel bad. I don't even look at those questions. I know. You know, it's like, maybe that's the test. Are you smart enough to realize these questions don't actually ask any way? These questions are nonsense. So genius requires intelligence, but then there's something else. Yes. And there's a secret sauce. Right. They be sort of X factor. And that's Cicero called it the quidum de winum, the kind of divine something that somebody like Socrates had. Socrates thought he had a dimonion, a little sort of spirit that followed him around and whispered in his ears. In fact, that's the Greek term dimonion, the dominion of diamond, gives us our word demon. But in Latin, that's called agenius, which is just like the word genius. And originally the idea was that that extra something was breathed into you by a god or a muse, or implanted in you by the gods. But it was a divine special something that ordinary human beings didn't have. Are you saying that's a genetically induced? What? I'm not saying anything about genetics. So we mentioned fascination with measuring the brains of these deceased geniuses. Well, I think the next step, which will be realized as technology improves, is of course measuring the genome. It's happening as we speak. So I just hosted a meeting of the International Society for Intelligence Research in Robert Ploeman. Yes, that's Robert Ploeman. Yes. Did you go to James Lee's talk? I did. Yeah, very, very impressive talk. And so they're searching for the genes of genius, or high intelligence anyway, and having a hell of a time finding them. A lot of them, right? Well, yeah. A lot of them in multiplying dramatically. So Robert Ploeman has made his life mission finding this gene for genius. And it turns out that there's not a gene, and there's not a hundred gene, and genes, and there's not a thousand genes. But there's probably thousands and thousands. And they're kind of interchangeable. So it's like the same genes get a peer and every single. And it's not for every single person. It's really a complex story. And the takeaway for me was twofold. So you have this bell shaped curve. Now we're all very interested at this high end of the curve, because we're all smart people. And we're here at this talk, and we're talking about genius. But evolution is selecting for the middle of the curve. That is where the sweet spot is for replication, natural selection to occur. And that's where the action is at the gene. So Robert Ploeman is looking for booster genes when actually there's suppressor genes. And the lack of suppressor genes that decrease your intelligence is actually the big story. And Dr. Lee and Dr. Ploeman are finding these stories that the lack of these suppressor genes are really more interesting than these booster genes for high IQ. There is one area where there's been, I think, more success to look at the genetic basis of genius. And that is not the focus on IQ, but the focus on personality. Because we know that most major personality traits have very strong genetic component, usually about 50% on the average credibility. And what's also interesting about this research is that it's helped us understand a little bit more a very important issue that has gone, well, it goes all the way back to Plato and Aristotle, the mad genius issue. What's the relationship between genius and mad stuff? I mean, Aristotle says that all geniuses are, even in politics, he said, you know, suffer from melancholic, which is just his word for depression and depression. And he was probably a depressed guy. Because he listed philosophy as one of characteristic. And what's interesting to me is that there is evidence that there are shared genetic basis between certain kinds of mental illness and certain kinds of creative achievement. It's not that highly creative people are mentally ill. It's just that there's certain things that allow them to be creative that are shared with people for mentally ill. Because they don't have whatever the moderating variables are. For example, reduced-laden ambition. I was going to say, what do you think those cognitive variables, the cognitive variables? They just can't. They have less ability to filter out irrelevant information. Well, guess what? That actually is useful sometimes. Because when you filter out something that's irrelevant, it actually may be something that, well, like serendipity, all serendipity by definition is irrelevant. And so you have spotted. Then that's domain specific though, right? In other words, one can imagine a correlation between poetic genius and a form of mental instability. Because making metaphor is drawing connections between dissimilar things. And you move that a little bit over and you got schizophrenia. And you can see how that might be. But presumably, in other domains, maybe not that. He's going to tell you something different. No, OK. Well, I mean, this is obviously very complicated. But if you look at scientific genius, their leanings are towards the autism spectrum. OK. And mathematics, for example, yes. And so in a sense, it's the opposite. Because they're so incredibly focused. I mean, when you figure out Albert Einstein, when he worked out his theories, well, if you don't realize, they're like, oh, you just come up with equals m c square, and you're done. I'm afraid he had to do calculation after calculation. He would often get those calculations wrong and would have to redo them. He worked, he published three papers on the size of a molecule, kind of a dumb thing. That's what he did his doctoral dissertation on. He got Avogadro's number wrong. He got wrong again. And he finally, on only a third calculation, he finally got it right, predicting it on the basis of his observation of the theory. So you have to be very, very focused in science. You're obsessed with Avogadro's domain. I think you're absolutely right. But I would make one observation, which is that the enormous powers of concentration that are required if you want to do high level mathematics or theoretical physics, those are developed. So when I was a kid growing up, my father, who was an engineering professor, I always thought of him as absent mind, and I used to joke with him. And I used to say, and I was kind of a normal kid, I thought, at least I think. And I used to say to my dad, hey, I'm never going to be as absent mind as you, dad. I think I'm different than you. And he said, well, just wait, because if you want to do the work that I do, you have to think. And when you're thinking, people will think you're absent-minded. And so what's actually happened is that as a kid, I could not hold some really complicated mathematical thing in my head and manipulate it. But now I can. It's developed. And so now my kids look at me, and I'm doing something, but they don't realize I'm doing something. They think I'm ignoring them or absent-minded. So it's a little bit more complicated than you think. They may actually be doing their work when they appear to be a kid. Sometimes I mean, Einstein would be talking with some gas. And all of a sudden, his mind would be elsewhere. He'd get up and go out of the room. And what if there's two main things that our brain does that's analogous to evolutionary processes, blind variation and selective retention? And so this is the mechanism of evolutionary processes. And this is kind of what you're describing. This variation process where you're thinking up lots of different ideas, and you can do mental simulations. But then you have to selectively retain, and you have to drill down. And at one extreme, and I wrote a paper on this that I think you reviewed as well, wrote a paper on this that at one extreme, blind variation can devolve into psychosis where everything is related to everything else. At the other end of the continuum, with selective retention, things get so narrow that there's only one solution become very rigid in your thinking. And autism is at the end of the psychopathological perspective. And the brain is designed to be, again, in the middle of the golden mean where blind variation and selective retention work hand in hand so that you can be most adaptive for problems that are well known, that you have to solve problems rapidly and accurately. That's kind of an intelligence thing. And problems are unknown where you have to come up with a new solution to a problem. That seems like the sweet spot. A good example of this is John Nash who recently died. He was the subject of this book, a movie, a beautiful mind. And he had a schizophrenic phase where he was really lost. And there were periods of time when he would wander around Princeton and just fill blackboards with just nonsense and crazy things. But then when he regained his sanity a little bit, people asked him, what were you doing all those years, John? And he said, well, these arguments that God is acting with Joseph Stalin to do something with Martians, those ideas came to me from the same places that the mathematical ideas came from. And so I didn't just treat them the same way. So it's very, I think it supports what your model. And from a neurological perspective, that's how we're starting to appreciate it. With networks in the brain that are involved with this variation process, the default mode network, and networks that are involved with the selection process, cognitive control networks, and how they have to work in tandem with each other. It's not just a place in the brain, but it's these networks working hand in hand that allows us to be uniquely human and successful as humans. This is relevant to another issue. If you look over at the program, they have all these really interesting issues. And some of my, I think we didn't touch upon because we're missing a person who's an expert in that area. But one of them is why not all child apologies grow up to become adult geniuses. And it's a very complex issue. It has to do with social development, a lot of other things. But one of them is, I guess this kind of blind version selective retention thing. When you see a lot of child apologies, they're usually in areas where you have to acquire incredible expertise, incredible expertise in chess, incredible expertise in mathematics, incredible expertise in music, performance, playing the violin, piano, whatever. And at the beginning, it's really helpful to just focus and focus and focus. It's very narrow, and we everything out beat towards the artistic end of the spectrum. But as you mature, that only works for certain kinds of things. You can keep on doing that for chess. You can keep on doing that for some kind of mathematics. But there's other areas where all of a sudden you have the openness to experience. You're still composing music. Most of those are a good example. He was a phenomenal child prodigy. The greatest child prodigy in music the world has ever seen. He was actually studied. A lot of people don't know this. There was actually an article where they studied him. The Royal Academy. At the Royal Academy. Yeah. And published in the transactions. I just read that. We read that recently. It's fascinating. I mean, it's obviously not that he would go chase around a cat. Yeah, he was still. That was used as a proof that he really was his angel. Yeah, it really was a child. But what was interesting is that a lot of people realized that he was actually slow to mature as a composer. Some of you may have heard this 10-year rule. It takes about 10-year. It took him longer than 10-years. He was composing at six. And it wasn't until roughly he was 29 that he started composing his first masterpieces. And what happened is all of his stuff beginning, the really great music. But it's just kind of music that everybody else was composing. And there's no there there. He had to go through his death of his mother. He had to go through an unfortunate love affair and a marrying the sister. And all these other kinds of things. He had experience in life. And it broadened him so that all of a sudden he could put meaning into his music that he didn't have before. He just had the technique. And then when he puts it there, the Viennese Society can understand it. And he starts losing his contrast. Right, right. And dies, you know, proper. Yeah, he paid the consequence for it. He became less popular. No, no, please. I was just going to say, Dean mentioned that this nexus between madness and genius goes all the way back to Aristotle and Plato. But in the 19th century, there's quite a developed medical theory that genius is a sort of positive side effect of mental degeneration. And you know, there's a lot of literature on this. But the story I love to tell is that the great French novelist, Emil Zola, suspects that he's a genius. But he's also an acolyte of this theory. So he knows he has to be somewhat mad. So he hasn't sort of analyzed by a group of 12 French psychologists who come to the conclusion that he's mildly neurotic, just neurotic enough to be a genius. But I function it. You're in a sweet spot. There you go. But when you talk about Mozart, or you could talk about Matisse or Botticelli, is IQ relevant there? I suspect that if you took the greatest, we in this room made a list of who we thought were the greatest novelists. And you gave them all IQ tests. They would all score above average. But I think very few of them would score really off the charts the way that astrophysicists would score or something like that. The average, the bill-shaped curve, would center around 120, around the Wexler scales. I think the issue here is you have to, and the same thing is true for the madness thing, that's like a pathology thing, you have to break it down by domain. And you can't do these big cuts even of artists versus scientists, because you've got to break it down much more fine. For example, you look at arts, and there's actually some research done on this, for example, where this guy compared highly formal abstract arts that are very logical, like a Mondrian, for example, with highly expressive emotive arts, like Jackson Pollock, for example, or abstract expressionism in general. And guess where all the psychopathology is? It's on the highly emotional expressive, and the highly abstract form, it's like mathematics. It doesn't require that kind of openness and craziness. But it's seen for physics, as you've shown too. Revolutionaries are more likely to show psychopathology than our theoretical physicists versus garden varieties. So you really have to cut it fine. And then again, just like it is for intelligence, or scatter around. So you don't have to be crazy. Einstein, maybe he was a little bit autistic, but he himself wasn't crazy. But he may have been carrying a gene for it because his science, and it's schizophrenic. Wonderful. I'm still not clear. Are you saying that the correlation between intelligence and genius applies primarily to fields like science, mathematics? Or is that applicable across the board to everything, whether it's painting, music? I think if you use the word intelligence, you have to be very careful of what you mean by that. So because there is an operationalizable version of it called G or IQ, that's the one we tend to focus on. That one tends to show a higher correlation with certain types of works, symbolic manipulation, mathematics, things like that, computer programming. But writing a novel I think has so many other ingredients in it that the loading on that particular kind of intelligence has decreased. But not absent. But not absent. It's like you said, 120 or something like that. Certainly not absent. These aren't dumb people. No. But they're spending more of their time thinking more concretely about things that happen in life. I think feeling 120 is not the genius. No. It's gifted level. It can't be. 120. It's all relative. It depends on who the 120 person is with. So yeah. I think if you ask, well, what is it that makes somebody a great novelist, they have to be able to read and write. But they have to think about humans and have insight into human psychology and life. And those are things which are not measured by these tests. So someone may be very, very off scale in their insight into human psychology. They may be off scale in their ability to write beautiful prose. But that's not measured by these little tests. And so they may come out as 120 on the little test, but they're one in a million in these other areas which we just are not very good at measuring. Right. So why isn't then the measurement made in terms of what knew did the person bring that didn't exist before? So let's say Manet in terms of painting bring something at a point. Yeah. That's the measurement that society gives in calling them the genius, the one in the million. Society then gives the acclimation or the collective approval that this person is, has produced something so unusual that that is the measure. I would say that's a much deeper way of classifying genius than just giving somebody a little test. This is saying, well, in the test, you're a genius as opposed to you contributed something really original. By definition, you can't standardize it. No. If you're going to score them on how original they are, then how do you standardize something like that? But I would say there is one problem here to capture. The societal level. I thought they're doing a whole set of genetic studies on it. So they are trying to standardize it, but are they standardizing it just for scientists or are they standard? No. All the genetic studies would use as the phenotype variable, a score on a test, like an intelligence test. Or a personality test. Any trait, that quantitative trait that you want to measure, you can calculate, for example, the correlation between a particular gene variant and that phenotype. And that's what's being done. But there is not a good phenotype as in made original contribution to society. That's quite difficult to standardize and measure. I just want to say one thing, though, back to the very first comment I made this evening, I think a lot of times we give someone credit for some huge original contribution to society. But that's a manufactured story. That person may actually not deserve the credit that we give them. And so I think you have to be quite careful about that. Or the person didn't get it in their lifetime. And much later they get it. Bend off. Most genes are dead. Yeah. Most people are dead too. Yeah. And there's a huge number. We could all name examples of Emily Dickinson. And Sprito Kahlo sometimes mentioned. But she was actually pretty famous during her lifetime. She had went her pain. Was Melville not, I guess, Moby Dick was not. Yeah, I think he was underappreciative. I don't know if he was neglected. You got published. And then there's the other example of somebody we think of Edison and the light bulb. I mean, the light bulb would have been invented many times prior to that. And he seizes the moment at the right time. There's myth making. Any of our big, whether it's Steve Jobs or people who are big figures today, there's a tremendous amount of determined, intentional myth making around all these people. Yeah. You have to be quite careful about that. By the way, I also have to say a lot of neglected geniuses are really honest to good, neglected geniuses that deserve to be neglected. I had this weird experience. I published a little tiny commentary in Nature. Oh, yeah. And I just raised this issue of whether or not geniuses extinct now in the natural sciences. I'm talking about physics and chemistry. You still want to be trouble for that. That's become such, you know, so expertise driven and group oriented and, you know, big research teams and big grants. And all of a sudden, I found out. By the way, they changed the title on me. So they said, is Einstein extinct, which is much more dramatic and sells lots of copy, but it wasn't what I intended. And there's all these people came out of the woodwork, you know, and they started saying, wait a second. I'm alive. And I said, well, what do you do? And he says, I've revolutionized theoretical physicists. You should appreciate that. They've actually proved that Einstein was wrong. So I said, can you send me a PDF of anything? Well, I haven't got accepted yet, but I have a YouTube. LAUGHTER Can I comment on your article? Because you read it. OK. Well, I think it raises an very important point. So in the era of Einstein. You didn't send them a YouTube, did you? I didn't. LAUGHTER We have to clarify that first. LAUGHTER In the era of Einstein, the top minds were drawn from a relatively small population. So if you think of the number of people today who have access to first-rate university education, it might be in India, it might be in China, and then access to first-rate graduate school, our talent pool is enormously larger than in the time of Einstein. So there is no doubt that in some sense of, if you just measure IQ scores, there are plenty of people around who are as smart as Einstein on that particular metric. But it is much more difficult to stand out today. Because every area of science, in particular, say physics, which I know well, is being worked on by very, very smart people competing against each other and pushing things forward a little bit at a time, working in big teams. So you just don't stand out. If you took an NBA guard today, and you had him play against NBA guards in 1950, he would embarrass those people. Maybe not Oscar Robinson, whatever he's in his favor. But he would embarrass almost all the other players in 1950. Because he would just be off scale for that era. But today, every game he goes to, he's evenly matched against some other players. So you don't think of that guy as a basketball genius. But he is a basketball genius. The talent pool has come from the pool. Yeah, the talent pool is just so tremendous now. And the set of frontiers that are being pushed forward in science, whether it's in biology or physics or chemistry, is so vast that we have a lot of geniuses. But they're totally unrecognized geniuses. Like a super-string theory. I mean, you have to be a genius to contribute to that. For example, for example, really impressive people are doing that work in that area. But no one's really stood out. And part of it is the problem that you said earlier. You can't verify which of these. And this one assumes 15 dimensions. And this one's 18. So which one do you pick? Well, they both give the same prediction. So this was more parsimonious, I guess. But to your point, does that mean that there's still geniuses out there? Or how do you define it? Because they're not achieving. They're not able to achieve. I mean, are there geniuses? But they can't achieve. There's not the opportunity to make those achievements. Because they're just the talent pools to offer. There's an issue of something we call low-hanging fruit. So how long have humans been doing science per se? A couple hundred years. So there are a lot of pretty easy things that got done early. And now there are a lot of things which are going to require teams of very, very, very smart people to filling in the details. So yeah. Well, it's not just filling in the details. So we don't know how to unify quantum mechanics and gravity. And maybe each string theory does. That's not filling in the details. That's a very fundamental thing. But it's going to take 1,000 Einstein-level people working on it to make it. Thank goodness the brain is completely unknown. And the brain, we still know almost nothing about the brain. So yeah, fantastic. Oh, God. I think this was mentioned in your little flyer as well. Has my favorite definition of genius. And it kind of fits in here. Because he puts the originality as the first requirement. But the second requirement is that the idea be exemplary. And what he means by that is that it forms a model for other people to follow and imitate or emulate or whatever. And I think that in the case of like Albert Einstein, like we were saying in that period, or in case of Niels Bohr or whatever, these people would come up with these ideas that people would immediately have to pick up on. I mean, you couldn't do quantum physics that ignore Niels Bohr and Heisenberg and the rest. So they reset the mark. But it's hard to know who's doing that now. Where everybody has to follow this guy or that guy. It's impossible for even a really great scientist in area A to actually follow what's going on in area C or D or E. So you could think of each one as a little microcosm where some genius work is being done. But it's so specialized now that it's very difficult for anybody to know what other people are doing. I want to ask you about what the thing you said about the basketball player. So you are saying a basketball player today is significantly superior in his abilities to a basketball player from the 50s. Yes. What does that say exactly? It's just that the pool from which the talent is drawn is much larger. So presenting. And the training and the techniques. But let me just say the pool. So that then wouldn't apply to genius because in genius, the idea is that there is something the person has given that makes them so. If you were a very, very smart kid and you grew up in Calcutta in the 1900s. Yeah, or even 1920, your chances of getting a decent education would be quite low. Whereas today with the Indian Institute of Technology, they're quite good at filtering the top young kids in India and bringing them. I mean, they're not fully efficient. But finding an early cultivating and then making sure that one could argue that in the time of Einstein, the actual population base from which the geniuses are drawn is more than 100 million people. Whereas now we're probably drawing from a pool of three or four billion people now. So. But the idea is that if you were basing it on an IQ test and if IQ tests existed in 16th century, that the numbers would be the same as the numbers that are now. So you are popping. So you are saying that the IQ, let's say, for the genius level is now higher than it was in the 16th century. And in the IQ has risen. Yeah, in the Flint Effect. Yeah, 100 or 150 years ago in the richest countries in the world, like the United States, the average years of education for an adult male would be something like six years or seven years. Well, IQ should be running into the education. Well, you did. No, no. I mean, unless you have some good environmental basis to build on, you're not going to achieve your full IQ. So actual raw scores on IQ tests. So, for example, the Swiss Army, sorry, the Swedish Army, there are various entities that have been testing IQ for over 100 years. And so they have scores on the same problems that have been given over a long period of time. And so there's been a gradual increase in scores. More people are getting them right over time. Because they have to make the tests harder, right? So they came off the farm and Sweden and they had four years of formal education. They weren't going to do very well in these tests. The average kid does much better. So in some sense, the environment has gotten much better for development of intelligence for the average person. And we're not quite sure if it's a combination or dietary factors. Nutrition. And people are reading and using their brain in a very complex way. So literacy has increased over the last century. Visual spatial development. People are using their brains in very complex ways. Visual spatially, this could be related. But the secular increase in IQ is a real thing. So when you go, I think it's when you go to first grade or kindergarten, I think to kindergarten, there is a test they give kids. And then some of these kids also have IQ tests. So you would. We just took naps in first grade when I'm. But look, in this sandbox, if I understand this. It's really changed over here in New York, it's different. If I understand you, when I went to nursery school, it was obligatory to take one hour nap. Yes, yes. It was. But so are you saying that the IQ of a five-year-old or a six-year-old when those tests applicable to that age are taken has the potential of developing and becoming a higher number? It has. Yeah, it already has. And that's why they have to rescale it. Yes. It's like what happened with the math portion of the SAT. People gain 800s and 800s and they try to rescale it. And they still start getting 800s and 800s. But you think of your genes as kind of a variance that you can be within. And you can either, if you eat a lot of lead paint and have a very restricted environment, you'll end up at the low end of that genetic variance. But if you have a very enriched environment and have parents that read to you and you have early education programs, you'll end up at the high end of that variance. And so the farmer in Sweden that never had an education will end up at the lower end of that variance and have a lower IQ versus the farmer that has educational opportunities. And as you mentioned, it's not just the education. It's the nutrition. How many of those farmers kids had had an orange at the turn of this century or had an orange during the winter? I understand. So what you are saying, if you said to me, it's in terms of that good parenting and reaching environment, good education, et cetera, will contribute to a smarter kid. And we've got a secular increase at all. If we are talking about genius, we are adding something on top of that. Yes. And are you saying that something on top of it is moving higher and higher? Not necessarily, but I want to say the following. So suppose you have many components that contribute to genius. So one is your raw IQ. One is your originality, creativity. Those are all things that are distributed within populations. And if I just give you a bigger pool of people to pick from, the person who's maximal on all of those qualities, or any particular sum of those qualities, will just be better because you were able to choose from a bigger pool. OK. And that's what's happening today. Good example is the chess genius, or interesting study of why are so many chess geniuses Russians or Hungarians or whatever? I mean, yes. What? Or a comedian? Or a comedian. Yeah. And it's a very simple answer, because there's so many of them playing. You know. It's an enriched environment. It's very competitive. They have very beginning. They have the chess clubs that are at very, very high level. Like at their ELO rating, at a very young age. I mean, you'd have this per capita kind of. There is a base population that you're drawing the champion from. And the bigger that base population, whatever the thing you're selecting for, you're going to get better champions. But one of the things you said is there's fewer problems to solve, too. So you have this incredible secular increase in intelligence, but you don't have an increase in genius, because there might be fewer problems. Or the problem, if you put us off a few problems, there are some of them. Maybe you didn't say that. No, I would say there are few problems that people readily identify as genius problems. But let me just mention that one in a million problems. Let me just mention that this thing is a million times more powerful than the computers that we had 20 years ago. Now, how did that happen? So this thing called Moore's Law is a doubling of our computer power every couple of years or so. How does that happen? The way it happens is there are thousands and thousands of electrical engineers and applied physicists who are not chopped liver, who are working on this problem. Consulate. They're working on this problem constantly with billion dollar budgets. And you're not aware of anything that they do, are you? But are they geniuses? Because I don't know why they're not geniuses, but you're not aware of them. And of course, another component of this, as you mentioned already, is that genius is a cultural label that we apply. And that is historically specific. People don't refer to individuals as geniuses prior to the latter part of the 17th century. The cult of genius emerges in the 18th century. And I'm always the token historian at these gatherings. So I will spare you a lecture, but there are culturally specific reasons why the cult of genius emerges in the 18th century. And one of them has to do with the new emphasis is placed on originality. I like to point out that if you look up the word to invent or to discover, if you look at those roots, the German for invent is effinden. And it literally means to find, to come upon. And that's reflective of a cultural mindset, same with the discovery. You're uncovering something of a cultural mindset that says, every truth in the world has already been discovered. God knows everything. What we do as artists, as thinkers, is recreate God's perfection. So in that world, you don't produce anything original. And there's a cultural impetus, rather, to imitate. Imitate is not to do anything bad. It's just to recreate, to perform the maces, which is the dominant kind of mode of aesthetics prior to the 18th century. Well, in the 18th century, you start to get a new emphasis placed on originality, both in the market. And I think it's not actually on coincidental that the cult of genius emerges at the same time as commercial society, when there's a kind of emphasis on bringing a new product to the market, tweaking a little bit on the neighbor's product so that you can get something new. Copyright law merges at the same time. An emphasis on the individual. Exactly. Exactly. And so that's all by way of saying that I think our need for geniuses has changed over the years. And we don't need the kind of geniuses that we once needed. Because the flip side of this is we have geniuses all over the place now. You can learn how to be a genius. You just go to Amazon. You get a self-fulfilled congenius. I'm not kidding. There are hundreds of titles. You two can think like Leonardo. Well, do you think that secular change is happening to bring us back to more of a democratization of genius? And that so we don't need this. Why do you think this is happening? That we don't need this individual genius and this kind of democratization is happening again? The cult of genius plays a religious role. The geniuses become secular saints. And that's a long story. And so about atheists. Well, there's that. But there's also, at the heart of democracy, there's a kind of discomfort with genius. Because geniuses are people who are naturally different and better than others. And we don't really like that. We're not really comfortable with that. Exactly. And so I think that there's always been a discomfort. And that sort of dialectic has worked its way out over the centuries. And we're at a place now where we live in Lake Wobagon. We're all above average. I mean, that's why there's such a hostility towards life. You have to do an education program. Because there seem to be elitists. Why spend money on these elite people who don't need any help? They've already got a lego. They already got it made. They already got the brain. So that's focused on the money in where it can be used. It used to hold. Like egalitarianism. That's make everybody equal. I think that's exactly how Americans feel. But I would say that the true secret of the world is technological and economic advancement are basically driven by some small percentage. A very small percentage in terms of cognitive ability of our population. And so to give you an example, quantum mechanics, which was invented in the early part of the 20th century, is now in roughly 10% of our GDP. So if you ask about telecommunications equipment or fancy chemicals, applied materials, all these things require some understanding of quantum mechanics to build and develop. But maybe 0.1% of our population actually understands quantum mechanics. And this is the other thing about the IQ thing, because I don't like to turn on IQ. General intelligence. And it relates to different areas of achievement. There are some areas where the knowledge base has become so complex that you need a very high IQ just to master it. I mean, physicists have an average IQ of about 140, which is the genius level according to the dictionary of the heart of the term. So that means the average physicist is genius. Psychologist? I hate to tell you. 120. It's much lower than that. But they're still creative. But they're still creative. And it's probably quite high for psychometricians, though. Yeah, but psychometricians. And so it takes a certain amount of, gee, general intelligence to master complex abstract knowledge bases. And physics, if any of you have taken physics courses, that is definitely a complex, act-back knowledge base. Oh, it took one physics course. I mean, just learning the math to be able to do physics. So I guess my day job is as an administrator at a big university with 50,000 students, and one can't really even speak those words in today's environment. So we cannot say, the provost will look at me and say, how come our students are having so much trouble with freshman chemistry or organic chemistry? Surely there is a way that everybody on our campus can pass organic chemistry or second-year calculus or multivariable calculus. Can't say they're not smart enough. Yeah, so it's kind of amazing that we've been talking a little bit about this IQ construct and all those others. But in higher ed, you're not supposed to say those things. It's the fault of the chemists that they don't know how to teach their stuff, because surely everybody can understand if they really want to. And so I think there's still this tension in American society between understanding that certain truths are true and living in some world of magical thinking. I can show the spell. Right? I want to say something to what you said, because it's one thing to say that the word genius, as it's currently used now, we're discussing it as a relatively new thing. But a lot of times, different cultures and different times and places will have sort of semantic equivalence to genius. Like, for example, in Chinese civilization, there's a certain poet, Libo, for example, who has had a term for it. It's like a fallen angel. Oh, Tiananzai. What? Tiananzai. Well, it means somebody who comes from heaven. Oh, yeah, someone comes from heaven. Yeah. And we also see that in, it means genius, basically. Yeah, I mean, basically it's a translation of each or defined Michelangelo's, what Vasari called Michelangelo. Because it was just like, where does it come from? Yeah. You know, it's just out of the blue, literally out of the blue. And so that's like genius. In the case of, I mean, it is like genius. And of course, every culture has heroes of the mind. But the Michelangelo case is interesting. I mean, Vasari uses, in the first edition, the lives of the painters, he calls Michelangelo divine, like 35 times, and it's like 50 something times in the second edition. The word do we know, right, the Latin. And prior to that point, been almost used exclusively for religious figures. And you get Brunelleschi's, you get described as a divine architect and so forth. And that in itself is a kind of shift from thinking about religious figures, especially touched to secular artists, right? I mean, Michael, he's still of the angels, right? He's angelic. I mean, he says the same thing. He said, and of course, that is an old way of thinking about genius that goes all the way back to Plato with his idea of divine fury of genius. But it carries on. I mean, there's a whole sociology that develops in Austrian Germany in the early part of the 20th century that refers to the Geni-Grelydion, sort of religion of genius, the modern kind of cult of genius. And this idea that geniuses are specially touched, yeah, that they have a kind of religious aura. You see this in the cult of Einstein. I mean, Einstein can see into the heavens, right? He can read the mind of God. He's called a Jewish saint. And even the interest in his brain, it's like he's different from everyone else, you know? It is like relics almost. People are getting little bits of his fingers or something. Yeah. You had that quote from Schopenhauer. It illustrates that talent hits a target that no one else can hit. Genius hits a target that no one else can see. Yeah. So just out of the blue, again. Yeah. Yeah. And of course, that has always existed, right? But it's the question becomes for a historian. Well, why at certain moments does this cult emerge? And what does that say about the culture, right? And how is it shifting back? Because it appears to be shifting back to a more secular conception of genius. Yeah. Yeah. By the way, this idea we talked on earlier about, you know, the relationship in native ability, you know, native intelligence, you know, the genetic component. And, you know, we didn't actually call it Flynn's law, but we were talking about for a while, I think they increased intelligence over time. One of my favorite examples, there are examples of cultures that came out of a nation that was relatively nondescript, and then in a very short time period, became the center of creativity for the world. OK. And one of my favorite examples is Islamic civilization. Except for poetry, the Arabs in Arabia had very little that was very distinctive in their culture in terms of contributing to world civilization. They are converted to a new world faith. They launch a campaign, a conquest. And they are all of a sudden forced to assimilate all these great ideas from India and Persia and Greece. And they not only assimilated it, but they integrated it to a new culture, a new civilization. And all of a sudden, they're making phenomenal contributions, leaving in the dust all the rest of human civilization, like in particular, certain areas like mathematics, for example, and medicine. Just out there to the hospital. Because of that openness. Because they were phenomenally open. Because they were so naive. You know, they come out and they have the Quran and their armies. And all of a sudden, there's all these books and experts on things. And there was a great caliph who set up what's called the House of Wisdom, where he deliberately said, there's a lot of things we don't know. And it's not an Arabic. So we brought all these people in. And they were not necessarily Muslims. They were Christians. They were medicans. They were Zoroastrians. And it says, translate everything into Arabic. So we don't miss out on anything. And the Ashkenazi Jews are a good example of this too. And the fact that you're getting out of your and being driven out of your home is another example. You are forced to invent new ways of solving problems. You're living in different through your exposure to new cultures and new ideas. Well, there's a lot of actually empirical research on multicultural experiences as conducive to creativity. And the Ashkenazi Jews definitely had that as part of a way of life. You're not advocating warfare, though. No, no, no, no. And the same thing happened with the old and old age of Islamic civilization. It was horrendously multicultural. And by the way, a lot they don't realize this. But even in the periods of conquest, most of the people in Islamic countries under the caliphate, in particular, were not Muslim. They belonged to some other faith, usually Christian or in the case of Persia, the Zoroastrians, and so forth. So it was a very, very multicultural society. So I've been confused about something I was talking with a friend earlier. We have this explosion of human creativity around 30 or 40,000 years ago. And why did this happen? And one of the things you start looking at, the Shulian hand-acts was the pinnacle of modern, hominid experience for 1.5 million years. And it was so stable for so long. And then 30 or 40,000 years ago, boom, you have agriculture, you have written language, you have culture, you have buildings, you have things that led to this. And in evolutionary time, this 30, 40,000 years is minuscule for this to happen. So one of the things that you read about is that people were coming out of Africa, and people were going into glaciers were retreating and encroaching on Northern Europe, and environments were changing in South Africa. I mean, was this of a theme that we're starting to see that this massive expansion of territory through warfare or through distribution of populations is the secret sauce of human creativity and innovation. It's also possible that on relatively short time scales, if selection pressures change just a little bit, you can have a secular increase in the average intelligence of early hominids. Dines off of the successful ones. Well, so for example, we've replaced the Neanderthals very quickly, actually. They were around for about a million years and didn't really accomplish very much. And so it's quite possible. We incorporated some of their DNA. And incorporated some also. They've also been an interesting addition to it. But I think as we get closer to the genetic basis for variations in human intelligence, we'll be able to look back, because we're getting quite good now at extracting DNA from dead creatures. We'll be able to look back at humans who lived 10,000 years ago, 20,000, 40, 50, and actually see how smart they were. Mm-hmm. It's interesting that I'm trying to remember who it was. I'm having problems, because I know this guy primarily by reviewing manuscripts that he submitted for publication. Not a week, really. No, no. And of course, it's anonymous. So by both ends, you know, double blind. So I can't draw into blank. But anyway, who's argued that general intelligence was actually a lot of people in cognitive psychology talk about modules. There's a module for this and a module for that, that evolution involved developing as various kind of module for language. And the magic of mathematics, or really arithmetic. And this person argued, I think he's at the Lenin School of Economics, he argued that general intelligence is a specialized module. Very interesting concept. It's a specialized module that appeared when human beings started exploiting new niches in the environment. Because it was the. Khonazawa? Yeah, that's it. That's it. You know, thank you very much. Eureka. Eureka. And that's an interesting concept, because how do you adapt to totally new environments that have never been seen before? Well, you have this module that's very plastic, and it can absorb a lot of information, a lot of new information, and form new adaptations, and so forth. And so it's kind of something ironic twist to it, that generalized intelligence may be a specialized module for adapting to new environments. And he's done that interesting research, where he shows that general intelligence correlates with people's preference for novel behaviors. Like, for example, one of the things I find really interesting is that highly intelligent people are more likely to like instrumental music, whereas less intelligent people are more likely to like vocal music. I think you better be careful. Tread it into a dangerous. Because, instrumental music is a little bit of a real trouble. It's for the dumb. I actually like both, you know? So I don't know how I feel about it. So Khonazawa is very controversial. And Khonazawa, these in Tubi, talk about two different modules in the brain, one that's a specialized problem solving, and one's more general improvisation module. And this is more analogous to my thinking that we have these two competing neural networks, not competing, but cooperating neural networks. One designed to do this intelligent hypothesis testing, which is rapid, accurate problem solving in the environment. And one, to do hypothesis generation when we don't know what to do next. And I think Cosmades and Tubi were probably a little more accurate in their conceptualization of these, maybe not modules in the brain, but networks in the brain that we're now coming to appreciate. And Khonazawa is misappropriating creative problem solving for intelligent problem solving. But we can argue about this for. One development that I think is really absolutely mind-boggling for me. And you kind of hinted at it when you talked about the Swedish things. In a lot of Scandinavian countries, they're doing these studies that are the whole population. They don't have samples. They have the whole population. I just reviewed a book that was on the relationship between psychopathology and male illness about Kyaga. And he's in Sweden. And his original study for his doctoral dissertation, he had something like 700,000. But now he's expanded a sample to over a million. Yeah, he's right. It's not uncommon to have sample sizes of order millions now for a lot of these studies. And so he can do these fine distinctions that you just can't do with small samples. Because he's breaking down creativity, for example, in all these sub areas and different kinds of achievement. Are you in a creative profession or not in the arts versus the sciences and that kind of thing? And then also breaking down the gene side of it. So what specific kinds of genetic disorders are associated with which kinds? And these are studies with typical ends that most psychologists work with. You couldn't do because you'd have one case in each cell. At the ISIR conference, they started to brag about this by saying, we're using scientific notations for our end, 10 to the fifth. I was that new. I didn't realize that. Because psychologists, it's like we had a neuroimaging. It's like we had a sample of 50 or 60 or maybe 100 is a big sample. But they kept going back and forth at this conference. Proaching 10 to the sixth. Yeah, 10 to the fifth, 7 to the log guys. The talk gets bigger than yours, my sample size. The talk that you mentioned at ISIR, which just happened, I guess it was a couple of weeks ago. This guy James Lee is a plumb in an eye, and James Lee are all collaborators. Yeah, Lee gave a very impressive talk. So the talk that James Lee gave was the result of a big collaboration called Social Science Genetic Association Consortium, which is an international consortium. They're probably something like 50 or maybe even 100 universities involved. And they have a pool of about 300,000 people for whom they have some kind of cognitive measure, and then they have the genotype. 32 of them. And they've reported at something called genome-wide significance, which is a statistical criterion. About 80 hits on specific gene variants that are associated with either slightly higher or slightly lower IQ. And so probably the way this field is going to evolve is that as we get bigger and bigger sample sizes, we will eventually get to the point where we've identified the probably of order 10,000 places in the genome, which are directly associated with either slightly enhanced or slightly decreased cognitive ability. And at that point, we'll be able to make predictions. So if you give me the genotype of a person, site unseen, run it through the algorithm, it will predict this person's IQ is 120 plus or minus 10. We can already almost do that for height. So we already almost understand the genetic architecture of height such that if you give me from, say, a crime scene, the DNA from a person, I can say something about the height of that person. I can say something very definitive about eye color, skin color, things like that. But these complex traits, which are influenced by thousands of genetic variations, are going to be the last ones to be cracked. But they're going to be cracked probably in the next five years, I would say. Which is scary to me because we might have, well, we already see this, this neo-ugenics movement where you find out the genetics of your infant before it's even born and decide this person can't be an NBA basketball player or this person can't be a scientist. It's quite what I want. Not quite what I want. And I think this is really worth thinking hard about because it's right around the corner. And we may. Also modification. Well, exactly. That's what I mean. And so we will say, we're not going to do that in this country for more reason, but somebody will. And then people from New York with money will start flying to the places of the world they will. So their children can have an IQ of 15, 20 points higher than the rest. And so again, I would say this is a time to study the history of this kind of stuff too because, get dark for the million or so couples in the world each year that go through in vitro fertilization or IVF. In almost every case, they are producing multiple embryos. And there is already a decision process that is made of which embryo should be implanted to become the child and which one should be frozen or disposed of. Now that decision process right now is quite primitive. So the doctor may eyeball the growing blastocyst and say, this one has good symmetry. I bet it's healthy. The next step is to actually take a cell from one of the blastocysts and sequence the DNA. So you know the genotype. And then you can exclude certain severe diseases. You may be able to say certain things about phenotypes like height or IQ. So that's where we're heading. And it's really all existing technology. The only last step is just the ability actually with the algorithm to predict the phenotype from the genotype. Well, cost and Moore's laws we're bringing down the cost. It's inexpensive. I mean, if you're not in the US, it's quite expensive in the US. But if you go to Asia where the success rates are actually quite high, a cycle of IVF is a few thousand dollars. It's not very expensive. Oh, I was talking about genotyping. Oh, the genotyping is, yeah, we still need to accumulate all that data. It's getting closer to $1,000. Correct. Correct. Closer to $100, which will be in the next. So my prediction actually is that if you define genius as having a particular IQ score, not having some outstanding unique contribution, but just the IQ part of it, humans are going to be much. There are going to be many more geniuses of that type on this planet 50 years from now than there are today. Because I think there's going to be an incredible increase in human intelligence. Because it's a bit of a place to live. Yeah. We'll need them to fight the rise of the machines. Well, that'll be the big fight. I hope Schwarzenegger is still alive. General intelligence. I'm sure this is on that note. Yeah. And that is what I'm sure this has stimulated a lot of interesting questions from the audience. So we'd like to open it up to people if you would line up at the microphone. And please speak in the form of a brief question. My takeaway from what you said is in terms of the title of the roundtable, Understanding Genius, is that we don't. That there is no objective reality of genius. The very many variants that high IQ alone is not good. If you have a high IQ and sit in a room and don't achieve something, not necessarily a genius. So I'm unclear about what understanding genius does unless it's to ultimately, scientifically, manipulate wherever the criteria you want to use to call genius. Because a great warfare, we've had authors that are genius, but they're not capable of being reproduced or tested. So that's what my takeaway is. Am I being too narrow in my understanding of what you said? I think your characterization is fair. I mean, you're talking about a very complex aspect of human achievement. And it's not going to be something we can just bottle and or define very precisely in a few sentences. So yeah, we're studying. We have a historian and a psychologist. I brought a thermos hoping that you could bottle it. I'm going to take it back. But I'm very much a joyous. I hope he didn't pay to get in here. Pardon me? I hope he didn't pay to get in. I'm hearing a genius scholarship. But I can't say that we're making progress in two areas, identifying talents that can become future geniuses, and then developing environments that encourage the development of those talents. But have you ever find it? Is there some objective? We're identifying genius. How do you define it? Well, talents. I mean, individual talents, mathability, the study of automatically precocious youth is a very good example with Benbo and Lubinsky. But it is a label that you put on after you think this is something that's a genius. Well, it's even worthy of labeling genius. But don't be a little labeling. Because a lot of the people be conscientious once they've been identified as a genius. Yeah, and it's a particularly important label, mathematically, mathematically, precocity. And now they're looking at visual spatial precocity. Some of these particular talents, I think, are very important for life outcomes. And whether they become geniuses or not, we need this human capital, which is another term that they use in future generations. This human capital, whether it becomes genius or not, is incredibly important and cultivate. The variables, the components of achievement, are worthy. But the label genius. Two people could look at these variables and one say that's a genius and the other say that's a fun thing. You know what they say about pornography, right? Yeah. You know what we see it? You know what the Supreme Court says about it. So I think we could make a list of 100 candidates for genius category. And probably we'd agree on 90% of it. There might be 10% that we wouldn't. So if that's enough to stop you from wanting to proceed further, then fine, we can work further on the definition. But I think we have a kind of definition that I think is largely agreed upon here. I think you can talk about, well, is there an IQ threshold? How do we identify these people early? Is there a way to measure their creativity when they're 14? Those are all things that people work on quite a bit. And so I think there is progress, but it's certainly not an answered. There are no concrete answers to all these things. Isn't that okay? Yeah. Yeah, I think you were accurate. Thank you. Yeah. Yes. I'm wondering how much of what we attribute to geniuses is due to the time and the environment they live in, as opposed to what they've actually done. If Einstein wasn't around 100 years ago, would somebody else have come up with the theory? And also if Einstein lived now, would he come up with a theory that explains what we can't do now? There's a very interesting phenomenon which we haven't talked about in science called multiple discovery in a dimension, where two of my people come up with the same idea totally independently of one another. And that's often taken. And I've actually done some research on that, and empirical research on that, and fit some mathematical models to explain it. One of the things that's interesting about it, if you look at it very carefully, though, is that you can go ahead and say, well, yeah, both Newton and Leidenitz came up with the calculus, for example, or both Wallace and Darwin came up with a theory of evolution by natural selection. But if you look at the theories very carefully, or the inventions very carefully, they're not the same. Newton's calculus and Leidenitz's calculus is very, very different, not just notationally, but in the general philosophical orientation. And in fact, a number of historians of mathematics argued that the commitment of British mathematics to Newton's version of calculus set back mathematics in Britain relative to the continent, where they were using Leidenitzian form of it. And you can see the same thing with Darwin and Wallace. They actually had a different version of evolutionary theory. Darwin thought that human beings could be included in natural and sexual selection, and Wallace did not. So what that means is that you would have gotten a different history of mathematics, or different history of evolutionary theory, if one of those had died in the crib. So because each one has something unique that they're contributing. Do you think we'd be in a different place now? I think we would be in it. I mean, this is all hypothetical, right? But you're talking about multiple universes. There may have been another universe out there. There was a Wallace universe. What? We're in the Darwin universe. Right. There's another one with the Wallace. Wallace published first. Yeah, right. Right. Exactly. My answer to your question is that these things are very contingent. Any great achievement is very contingent. So if Einstein had been born at a different time, a different place, he would probably be recognized as a very insightful smart guy. But he certainly wouldn't, almost certainly, wouldn't have this reputation that he has in our world. Right. Another point I'd like to make is that, what was the other point I was going to make? Oh, Einstein actually, technically, in terms of his mathematical ability, was not that strong. And so if he were today trying to do string theory, I think he would have quite a difficult time. So the great Harvard biologist Stephen J. Gould had a line where he said, I'm less interested in the shape of Einstein's brain and more interested in the people of his skills who died working in rice fields or what have you. And that does point to the role that context plays. And we can all do this. You can cluster genius. 4th century BC Athens, 15th century Florence, New York in the 1950s, when you've got these really highly creative minds all working around common problems, that does something, Silicon Valley in the 1980s. No, yeah. But there's a really interesting example. If you've mentioned the Einstein example, when the Nazis took over Germany, they started rewriting the history of physics, because they didn't like the fact that there were too many high quality Jewish physics. Jewish physics. Yeah, that was right. And so it was actually one guy named Stark, notorious, not see theoretical physicists. And so he wrote a book on famous physicists. And it's very interesting, because most of the names look very, very familiar until you get to the 1930s. And all of a sudden, where you would expect a biography of Einstein to be, there's a biography of Hasenro. How many of you have heard of Hasenro? I've heard of Hasenro. Hasenro actually came up with all the things in Einstein's theory that was important, which means non-Jewish. The non-Jewish portion of it. And then everything else, of course, could be dismissed. And there were some things. Hasenro did work on the early stages of relativity theory and what have you. But he wasn't on Einstein. But it's an illustration of how the cultural context, of course, unfortunately, that was a temporary one. But what if the Nazis had won? There you go. Then we wouldn't be talking about Einstein. We'd be talking about Hasenro. Well, I think even the history that we have is not reliable. So I think if you looked carefully, you would find grotesque distortions in some of our histories. Exactly. Yeah. Is there any evidence that Jesus are happy? Oh. Well, I think life satisfaction is actually, correct me if I'm wrong, somewhat positively correlated with IQ, right? So that vague sense. I don't know that geniuses are necessarily tortured people. I knew Richard Feynman. He was quite happy. Terry Tao seems quite happy. So that's anecdotal. It's anecdotal. Well, I gave you the statistical result, which is pretty dry. This is just positive correlation. But there is a problem that, again, we have to talk about different domains. Because one of the nice things about working in the sciences of mathematics is you know when you're doing good stuff. You can go ahead and work out the equations, double check. You're math to make sure. But if you get the answer, you've got the answer. But what? And I've done research, too, and showing that the consensus, like, for example, in the hard sciences, they recognize up and coming stars very, very quickly. Because they know what's good and what's not. But if you're in the arts, you know, that struggling artist in the attic, it often happens. You're not immediately recognized. So is it the recognition that makes them happy? Or is it the higher? Well, sometimes it's a two-inch sword. You know, you have someone like Truman Capote. Yeah, it's really great, you know, to get recognized very early. But then all of a sudden, there's more pressure on you if you're a next novel. You're the one hit wonder, yeah. Yeah, and you're just going to parties and getting drunk. And people were asking about your next novel. So I wrote a history of happiness before I worked on genius. So I've thought about this a little bit. And the thing that I would say is that there's clearly a myth associated with genius that correlates with unhappiness, with mental instability, and so forth. So we talked about Aristotle's theory of that people of eminent achievement have a superabundance of black bile, of melan, ochre, and the Greek, they're melan and that idea gets kind of reinvented in the Renaissance and then again in romanticism. And you get this idea, which I think is still part of our culture, that sadness is profound and happiness is sort of superficial, that to think and think deeply, you know, is like Walter Benjamin says, you know, every document of Western civilization is a document of barbarism, right? That truth is somehow dark. Now there may be something to that. But I think it's also a kind of stylization in a myth. And that, as you say, you know, Richard Feimand, Einstein was comparatively happy. You know, in Silicon Valley, they're all really happy. Yeah. Yeah. Rich, serious. Money does buy. So this isn't exactly a question, but sort of an observation. So I think what the public typically recognizes as genius, finding, hitting the target that no one even saw before. So it's highly specialized in a particular niche. So if you think about Mozart, was Mozart also a great mathematician? Probably not. So that in itself is some kind of a clue that it isn't a general brain mechanism. Just maybe you can comment on that. Well, why wouldn't it be a general brain? So you can have domain specificity. And you can have, but I think, you know, to, again, to have these modules of the brain, there's a module for art and there's a module for math and there's a module for basketball and there's a module for this. I mean, it doesn't make it. It doesn't make sense, right? So there has to be some general characteristics of brain functioning that come to play. It's up in math and not in art or the philosophy. Well, I don't know. I mean, you know, historically, actually, the idea has been that genius is a, you're born with it. It has to be original. It can't be learned. Talent can be learned and acquired, but not genius. And it's applicable to multiple domains, right? So that Mozart made a choice early on, but he could have gone another way. And then you get examples of people who have genius level capacity in multiple domains, like Goethe, right, who is a kind of genius in poetry and playwriting, good scientist to boot and so forth. But I suspect that there's this general module wherever you went. There's this general brain module or general network that comes to play, regardless of the individual domain that you practice. What it might be that genius is more recognized in the sciences and in literature and that there are genius capabilities that go less recognized, but this human capacity is quite general capability. I'd like to just tell us how it's an approach to, like, intelligence that's kind of emerging now because until 50 years ago, very few educators even knew what a brain was. Like, they thought your brain was actually a storage place in your body for sperm. I mean, that's just true. But I have a little video just to put what I'm going to say in context. It's called, where I have five-year-olds who talk about life with more than most adults and the five-year-olds from New York, and they say, no adults left behind. But I've asked over 30 professors just to put this in context. If they knew the etymology, the word intelligence, which has been brought up today, none of them have known. I'm just curious if any of you know the etymology of intelligence, which you might have known in the second grade. Do any of you know? OK, if you just cut the word in half, intelli means between the other half of the word is legary, which means to choose. Intelligence literally means to choose between, that you're not using your brain supposedly until you're making a choice. OK. But the point where I'm coming from is that basically the way the brain works with the new research and brain research now, basically the way your eyes work is the way your brain works. That's why you say, I see what you mean. I use my imagination. But ironically, you cannot see, as you know, without moving your eyes. You have a fovea, narrow point. So you have to be moving your eyes very. So they say in a state of nature, when a human being, like I said, we all live in the Amazon rainforest, we've been moving our eyes left, right, up, down all the time, and our brains evolved that way. So in the state of nature, a human brain evolved to be aware of seven streams of awareness simultaneously. That's why seven is the sacred number. When we lock up our eyes on static letters we read and write, we actually atrophy the way our brain operates, and we go from seven, like, to one. So when you hear that a human brain is naturally, and maybe these people in these genius states, are more open that they're not locked in to just doing what they've been told. So they're moving their eyes. Their brain is open, and they have access to that seven, the natural sacred number. And because they do, they maybe have taken a stroll at a Plato's cave with the shadows or letters on the... But what about, you know, when you hear about the seven point natural awareness and the craziness that we're going down, we're dumbing ourselves down, atrophying the way our brain works from seven to one, because we're locking up our eyes on letters, and a letter in a name is actually just a name for an object or an image. It's a sound that doesn't mean anything. Can you do me a favor and ask the question? Because you keep going around, and we're the best ones. It's the seven point awareness that is a natural part of us that's been covered up. And now that it could be opened up, and people could have access to it, and you say maybe genius comes from having access to that. What do you think about that is the new research that's taking us in that direction? I can address that. That's bunk. So... That's what? Bunk. According to who? Me. So... So you said so many things that I could disagree with, but I don't want to spend a whole bunch of time. So we know very little about how the brain actually functions as neuroscientists. So a lot of the assertions that you make are fundamentally flawed. I think that the basis of your question is that you're getting to a point where you think that people are using their brain in a different way that you think is flawed, correct? No, it's not me. It's like... And just... All this stuff is coming out of behavioral obtitration training. Here's what I'd like to say about that. People are using their brain in a different way, and it's being optimized to their environment. So that optimization to the environment just reflects a new environment. It's a different environment, but it's a new environment that that brain's being optimized for. I think we should get to the next question. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Hello. Hi. Good afternoon. I came in towards the latter part, but I have a question regarding inheritance of genetic genius, so to speak. I don't know how you would put that in factor. I'm one of a multiple birth of triplets, two boys and a girl. And basically, a lot of the factors that I noticed in the geniuses in the family is that literally we can master things at a early age, since like seven, eight, nine, ten years old, and we're everyone. This is from the 60s and 70s. I'm last at a baby boomers. So, yes. You and me both. Yeah. I'm 51. It feels great. But it doesn't feel so great to me, but... I'm doing yum. I'm doing yum. The factor is that my brothers, I'm the only girl. So, the two identical boys, I'm wondering if this is a factor. The first boy was born. I had my own embryonic sac, which I call my condo. I came between the second. I came as the second. And then the third one, the two identical boys were separated. I came between, and I didn't understand if that was a factor of what happened to the oldest boy, because things started happening. Ten, psychologically. And I wanted me coming between the two births of the two boys. It became... You know, only God knows, but the family always said, it was you. You came between the two identical boys. He separated them. And, you know, I know what he says. He said, talk. I think you answered your own question. Only God knows that. Yeah. And trust me, that's been my sanity. But the fact of my question is, again, is... They were geniuses way before I considered myself a genius, because where they mastered technology in old school days, there was always a motherboard hanging around the technology, the big zen of TV tubes. I'm seven years old. Everyone's sitting in the living room. I know how to go on the back and fix the zen of tubes. Take the ones that's in the kitchen cabinet and fix the TV in the back and just sit back down and look again at the TV. And everybody's like, what did you just do? How did you just do that? There's a lot of things I've done in my life. I could never explain on 51. I still can't explain. But it can come to me with numbers, even visions. And I can master it, where it takes someone to go to school for eight years, even to get a master's degree. So on that factor, it's kind of coming to me later now than earlier. And I was trying to figure out the geniality of it, you know, the inheritance. But, yeah, techs, doctors, lawyers, easy age. Like, we can master it. I studied neurosurgery since it's great. Can I actually say something? Okay. So you raised an issue that we actually didn't talk about. Actually, a couple issues that we didn't talk about. Oh, okay. I thought I missed it. Yeah. There's so many things that you could talk about in this topic. Okay. And one thing that is really interesting to me is there is some work on the intrauterine environment as a factor in the emergence of at least certain kinds of genius. And like, there's something called a, I mean, it's not completely established. Here's another good notion, right? That the interuterine environment can influence brain growth at a very early age that has lifelong consequences, particularly for developing certain kinds of exceptional abilities like in mathematics or music, for example. But we still don't understand it. But we do know, I mean, obviously brain chemists is being influenced by that which ambiotic society you happen to be in, right? If it's a different one than others. Yeah, we just... Another issue thanks to your prompt is birth order. It was actually Francis Galton who did the first study of birth order. And of course, you have two brothers. Birth order interacts with gender as well. I mean, I did a study, really interesting study. Well, we researchers always think we do really interesting studies. You may disagree. You actually do interesting studies. But I did a study of eminent women in psychology, eminent scientists in psychology. And women, and comparing them to comparably eminent men, looking at birth order. And I found that there's a tendency for... And this is just a scenario. A tendency for not only for women to be firstborns, firstborns are overrepresented among scientists, okay? But they're even more likely to be firstborns than melisar. And they're even more likely to come from smaller families. And they're extremely unlikely to have older brothers, which is spoil things. Development of talented female scientists. So there's all these other factors. You know, it's a whimsical thing like birth order. Yeah. Or, you know, the chemistry of your intrauterine environment can have... Let me just get you another arbitrary thing. It's sort of like birth order, but even more arbitrary than birth order. There was a study done of music competitions. You know, these big things like the... You know, clivering kind of competition. People come in. They play a piece of music. And they deliberately have a piece of music that nobody knows, including the judges, to equalize things. So they're all doing the rock, mononoth, third or something. And what's interesting is that they find that the people are more likely to win the prize or the people will perform later in the competition, because by then everybody's more familiar with this new piece of music. They've heard all the little glitches. And it's, by the way, it's random assignment. It's random assignment. What order you perform? Okay. Just to... Okay. I mostly among creative people, spent among creative people. Artists, poets, and writers. And I could say that among artists, it's very few really intelligent people. And... Better you said that than him. So much more among poets and more among writers. And they try to suppress their intelligence with the legal drugs very often. So my first question about how you can comment that people deliberately try to suppress their intelligence with the legal drugs to be more creative. And second question is, it's several years ago I read about several women who took sperm from noble lawyers and give blood to kids. And then when these kids start to grow, they encounter very big problems how to raise them. And now they fighting for ability to learn who really drew their parents and how they can connect with these kids. Because it was like manipulation of genetics. And it seems like you have at least two loved person who give blood to your child that understands what is going on. Because they just don't understand. And they are autistic with problems and they don't get also suffering. They don't know what to do. So if we manipulate genetics of our kids we won't know how to deal with it. So that's two questions, the legal drugs and if we manipulate genetics would be recognizing and going to raise our kids. Can I address the first question if I understood it correctly? About suppressing intelligence in the... Because it won't go for artists in musicians. Since we're at the Sacramento-Liddick Institute I should bring in Freud at least somewhere. Freud actually addressed this issue and one of his essays he was dealing with the question, why is it that critics aren't very creative? They know everything about films, they know everything about novels, everything about poetry. They can't create one themselves. And he specifically said... And they know that, right? And it's because they're 100% secondary process. They never allow the primary process any latitude. The second the primary process is coming with some kind of crazy idea, it's merely squelch. By the super eager... That would make a lousy movie. I mean Dean's theory seems very plausible to me because I think if you want to be open to the creative process you maybe want to suspend judgment. And the kind of thing we call intelligence is a kind of analytical judgment that maybe you're trying to suppress when you try to get new influences. As far as your second question, so I think there's been at least one book written about the Nobel Prize sperm bank. And oftentimes when people review that book, because they don't think statistically they just think anecdotally, they try to portray it as a huge failure or something. But if you just made a prediction based on genetics of what would happen if you took sperm from a bunch of Nobel laureates and you gave it to a bunch of recipients, you'd probably say that the kids will be somewhat higher in IQ on average because they're getting genes from a high IQ, at least one of their parents is high IQ and probably the other one maybe as well. Secondly, maybe some eccentricities like things like autism might be more prevalent in that population. And I think that's roughly what was found. So I don't think it's more or less conforms with what just on the basis of genetic theory you would predict would have happened with this sperm bank. Now some people who wrote the books on this would say, oh well it's awful that it didn't produce another Nobel Prize winner. It should have definitely produced a Nobel Prize winner otherwise it's a failure. But I think that's going way too far. No, I'm thinking about how today as a child that you don't have any connection. That's the point of what is the beginning? Is it just little kids? These women don't know how to raise them. They have very big difficulties with these kids because they cannot connect with them at all. I see. Is it different than the problem they say a parent of an autistic child would have? Similar? No, maybe similar. I don't know. I'm not a human. I don't know. I don't know. But there must be also, I would predict some similarities between the child and the mother. And you would think the maternal love is still there and everything. I wouldn't expect it to be as quite as bad as you described it. Okay. Okay. Well, I have some problems with the language you've been using and I have a problem with the concept of IQ test. First of all, genius, maybe the word is been overused. Maybe we should say creativity because genius has so many problems connected to it. The other aspect of things, the IQ test. Well, I find it a very problematic thing. And I always see the creative individual as having a mode of thinking maybe with different synapses, different ways of approaching something. And an IQ test is too standardized. And I remember taking when I was so bored that I decided I couldn't bother with it. And I looked at my neighbor and I said, I'll just copy that. And they told me, oh, you're a wonderful, you're an average person. I said, oh, thank you. But I think we have to find a different way to define intelligence. And I think it's a very complex, the way creative people think. There is some form of deviancy even. Maybe they can't even deal with the normal situations of things. Sometimes I think of it as the pearl that has an irritant and they have to find a way around a problem. So I think the problem in the brain is not going to be very standardized. It's going to be a very common, I'm an artist. But it's a very complex aspect of how different synapses connect different things. And creativity lies in this strange way of organizing and assimilating the world. And we have so much knowledge now that it's true. One of the problems you brought up is for true creativity, it's very difficult because there's so much more of a branch of knowledge than even Leonardo da Vinci had to have. And I know they're not questions, but I can try. And what question? You want questions? All right. Well, the question is the structure of the brain. Can it be measured by an IQ test? Are we really speaking about the true measurement? And the other thing is the conflict between individual intelligence and collective intelligence where a group of individuals are working out a problem together. Then we're into another problem. But I'll just keep the structural problem of the brain. Do we really know what intelligence is or how it operates? That's your question, Guy. So we've correlated intelligence tests with the structure of the brain. Many researchers have done this and found the correlations to be low, but significant across studies. So I wrote a paper in 2007 in behavioral and brain sciences where I reviewed all the studies looking at the correlations between the structure of the brain and these various measures of intelligence. And that's called the parietal frontal integration theory of intelligence. So it summarizes kind of a network in the brain that underlies the ability of humans anyway to express intelligent behavior as manifested on these particular kinds of tests. So there is a significant correlate between the structure of the brain and performance on these tests. As you would expect, whether it's creativity, personality, intelligence, just about anything our brain does, motor behavior, there's going to be some correlates that are found in the brain and certainly we found that with intelligence. I would have addressed the collective intelligence idea because this gets back to what we talked about earlier about collaboration being very important in certain fields, picking the sciences. And one thing I think is fascinating is that there's a kind of isomorphism between how creativity operates in a group and how creativity operates within a single individual who's highly creative. What I mean by that is we mentioned earlier that highly creative people tend to score very high on openness to experience and they have multicultural experiences. They have lots of very wide interests. They're just very, very open to a lot of different possibilities. They have a lot of different hobbies. There's one interesting study for example that stratified scientists from the elite of Nobel laureates to only members of the National Academy of Sciences. And then people who didn't even get that high and looked at their their educational interests. And it was beautiful. More artistic interests as you go higher up. So diversity is really interesting. They're complexity. They're heterogeneity of their minds, their interests, and their even their expertise. I think I could play the piano. I can also sell a book. I don't know how much expertise is involved in that. If you look at groups, when the main predictors are creativity in a group is how heterogeneous the group membership is. Do they differ in their training? Do they differ in gender? Do they differ in ethnicity? It's an amazing phenomenon that really diverse groups. So in a sense what you do, you're having is instead of having all that diversity in a single brain, you're having a division of labor, of diversity is distributed within the group membership working on a problem. It becomes a neural net that solves problems. Yeah, neural net work. You have to have lots of different abilities to be able to solve that problem well. Okay. Hi. Dr. I have like two five second questions. Yeah, it's okay. In the forms of question. Yeah. Wow. The first one is working hand in hand was mentioned in lateral conductivity. I was wondering if there's anything left and right brain balancing. There are brain balancing centers. Yeah, I can answer that very quickly. So this left brain right thing is considered to be neuro mythology at this point. And certainly you need all of your brain to do creative tasks as you do intelligent tasks. So this comes from work by Spery and Gazanica in the 1970s who did corpus callosodemies on patients with epilepsy is a long story. But they found that the hemisphere's function rather differently. Language tends to be in the left hemisphere and nonverbal stuff tends to be in the right hemisphere. It's got taken up by the popular press like wildfire. The one is intensely active, the other one is not nearly as active. No. This is working on activating the other one with certain activities. So during creative activity the activation pattern is moving around during in these different networks and there's probably suppression of different parts of the brain, activation of the other different parts of the brain, but that moves around from place to place. It's not isolated. It's not isolated. The other question is, any research on proactively cultivating EQ and the correlation with a rise in IQ as a result? This is an easy question because I don't know hardly anything about EQ. I would expect, I think, you might know something a little bit about EQ that is probably a little, it is emotional intelligence or emotional intelligence is going to be somewhat positively related to intelligence because of the general factor of intelligence. I would guess, but I don't know anything beyond that. The problem is that the psychometric properties have emotional intelligence. It's not at the same level. It turns out to be a very heterogeneous construct. It's just sort of like creativity in comparison to general intelligence. So it's a real mess. You know what's going on? There's no correlation study as far as, oh, you work hard on raising your kids EQ that would really be a good question. I don't know if any of these. I mean, there may be, I wouldn't know. But I would like to answer that. I don't know if this is valid or not, but I've never seen some study where, at the point of this, you know, this mythology of, you know, writers of left hemisphere, it was very interesting that my dad was, maybe his hope or something like the HOPPE. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And it was something about that they can't understand metaphor because they have to put things together from both sides of the brain. Like, you might like a neurological study of patients. And, yeah, and one of the experiments I thought was really brilliant is that you show people a film clip where there's a kid playing on a swing and then a ball goes out in the street and the kid definitely runs out in the street and then all of a sudden you just see this empty swing. Yeah, what happens next? Yeah. Or what happened? Right. What happened? And people who have normal intact corpus callosis figure that out and people who have split brains can't figure out what happened. No, it gets weirder than that. You have patients that will be, you know, buttoning their shirt with one hand and unbuttoning it with the other. The two hemispheres function independently right after the surgery. So, yeah, friends like that. And if the hemispheres can't communicate from a neuropsychologist by training, from a neuropsychological perspective, it gets really interesting if you can show someone a key only in their right hemisphere, for example, and you can do this with tekistoscopic presentation on the retina and they can't access it, they can feel it, they can touch it, but they can't name it. They don't have access to the language module, they can't name the key. It's really fascinating to see the modularity then of the brain functioning when you can split the corpus callosis. So, if you want to increase your creativity, do not get a split brain. No, no. You need both halves of your brain to be creative or intelligent. Or have personal... Last three questions. First of all, thank you for having the discussion and thank you for steaming it live. My friend is watching it right now and he has the question, can you comment on the current state of research on enhancing fluid intelligence? Do we know of any methods just enhancing that part? Enhancing, oh, yes. Yes, so Dr. Yege from California, UC Irvine, I believe she is at now, did some working memory training to increase intelligence and the theory is that you can do this dual and back type of, which is a very difficult task to do where you're keeping streams of information going. Yeah, it's very unpleasant actually. You want to shoot yourself after you do this type of task, which is the best decision you could make. But the theory was that you did this working memory task and because the working memory networks are parietal frontal distribution, overlap the intelligence networks, you could increase your intelligence. So she published this in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Science and many people have attempted to replicate this in different ways. She's replicated it and it's very equivocal about whether this actually does and the research. The best digestion of the research that I can give you is that there's near transfer and far transfer. And if you do a working memory task, you are likely to increase working memory, but the likelihood of increasing intelligence, which is kind of far away, is rather low. If you do an attention task, you're likely to increase attention. If you do a visual spatial task, you're likely to increase visual spatial ability. But to have that transfer to other tasks is not been well demonstrated through replication. We used to have that belief that brain exercise is good for you. It's like exercising your muscles. It doesn't matter if you're lifting a dumbbell or whatever, you know, lifting up is lifting up. It doesn't seem to be that case, you know, so... Or that easy. Yeah, so that you say learn Latin and make sure it's smarter. Well, no. I'd rather do the dual end back task. Yeah, you're right. No. Thank you. Next question. No, we had three. You're going to be the fourth. No. I have two there. Okay. All right. Go ahead. But many years ago, I wrote a song called I Used to Think I Am a Genius. My great fun singing that to roomfuls of genius. I just want to quote the last line. I used to think I'm a genius. Please don't ask me why. But now I know I'm not a genius. I'm just a wonderful guy. All right. Next. Perfect. I guess. Is there a corollary for genius being attached to ineptitude in other areas such that people like Einstein might not have been able to wash his clothes or set the table while he was, you know, fastnesses of physics and so forth. I have noticed very, very intelligent people often don't manage without something to do their washing or clothing or set the table or something like that. Thank you. I think that's a very interesting question. So there's a stereotype that we all know about, right, that the great genius can't handle everyday things, can't tie their shoes, they're clumsy. And I'm guessing that if you're really careful, carefully study this issue, it's not true. But I think that if you were intensely interested in your work and you just wanted to achieve in that narrow sphere as much as possible, it would be great if you could outsource your daily task to someone else to help you free up. I really, I would love to see a study actually. I mean, if you just look at the sort of not focused on genius, but just focused on sort of the broader population and sort of IQ, you find that people who have IQs, they tend to also be good at lots of things, so they're not necessarily incapable. And Terman actually found this, I think, in his group that they were quite healthy, physically strong, healthy group of people and they didn't seem to have particular handicaps. But you mentioned, I mean, I think what it is, you do have these obviously strong cases, conspicuous cases like Albert Einstein, but even Hannah, you have to be very careful, because a lot of times he was very smart. I mean, yeah, he's got his priorities and he wants to work. So like, yeah, he didn't wear socks, okay? But he had a very good reason for not wearing the socks. It's because he always got holes in them and he says, it's ridiculous. Always wear something that you wear out. So he stopped wearing a sock. He was once asked for his phone number and he said, well, okay, let me just see if I can find it. And he said, you don't know your phone number? And he says, I can always look it up. So I think that's actually smart. He's got his priorities kind of organized in the right way. And Carler with that is an outsized appetite, I think, goes with high intelligence such that I know Einstein was very sexual with many women. Many men are, of course. But I think... Or would like to see many women are... That's part of the openness to experience. That's part of the human experience. But I make a connection between an outsized brain with an outside need for food, perhaps sexual appetites as well as other inputs that feed the creativity. And I don't think it's ridiculous to hypothesize that. I mean, Newton never had a lover, another Emmanuel Kant. But that connection between sexuality and genius is a long history. In fact, the word genius that I mentioned before, Latin, comes from the Latin verb, genogener, which means to generate. It gives us genes and genitals. And there's an association drawn very early on that productivity is somehow sexual. If you've ever seen the famous statue by Rodin of Balzac that's in the sixth hour when he's more of Paris, you know, he's in... He always rode at night and he would wear these great overcoats. And there's a kind of conspicuous bulge there in one part. Well, in his studio afterwards, they found there are all these studies of Rodin holding his phallus. And so this is this kind of myth of the pro-dian artist who is sexual, but I think that's largely a myth. But nonetheless. It also touches upon perhaps something that we've not quite talked about. I mean, it's been a very cortical-centric discussion. But if somebody like Pang stuff is correct in terms of the seven areas of the brain stem, seeking rage, lust, play, et cetera, then what contribution does this have to what we consider to be hiding at higher levels of creativity, genius? Certainly. Yeah. I mean, it must be there somewhere. These very basic type of instinctual types of responses either have to be kept at bay while we're doing those higher meaningful things or incorporated somehow. So they're open area of research and we must understand how they play. And they may play out in these sexual appetites. They may play out in addictive appetites and other, a pettitive type of behavior in very important ways that we don't understand. I think that's fascinating. The last question is the... The last question. The last question. The last question. Yours will be the last. About intelligence testing at the idea of stage before pre-implantation? Whatever is possible right now, how much would that cost? And if there's an equivalent of a more law, what we can expect that to cost in five or ten years? Yeah, so the main issue now is the availability of large amount of data so you can build the predictive model. So we just don't have good predictive models for cognitive ability based on genotype now. We do for things like height and other things, but not for IQ yet. The cost is actually not very high. So the cost to do the genotype being is on the order of a few hundred dollars actually for that embryo. And so I don't think the cost is the real barrier. The barrier is just getting enough data so that you can build the predictive models. Do you think the open source or the data will be able to... I think that these predictive models, whether they are predictive of disease conditions, disease susceptibility or physical proportion, whatever it is, they will be among the most valuable pieces of intellectual property because they basically deal with the internal blueprints of the human species. And so whether they'll be open sourced, I don't know. Okay, last question. Edison, Einstein, Leonardo da Vinci, Steve Jobs, Branson, Newton. They say they would dyslexic, right, and a lot of others. Is dyslexia a really a learning disability or is it something to do with the genius? And also the visual and verbal, right? A lot of these people had visual thoughts. They didn't think verbally, right? So again, is dyslexia really a learning disability or is just a different way of thinking? And people with dyslexia are being dictated by the people in the bell curve in the middle? With the learning side. Well, from a neuropsychological perspective, dyslexia, reading is a relatively new human behavior that's rather unusual for the brain to do, but the brain can do it. And the brain of most people can do it, but the brain of some people cannot. So dyslexia is an interesting neuropsychological phenomenon, and people who are dyslexic use their brains in different ways, and so they develop other strengths to compensate for this lack of reading ability. And that may have something to do with their creative ability. And you do see some studies support an over-flight, over-representation of dyslexia and creative endeavors, but I think there's something interesting there, but like the mad genius, I think we could... We have a mad genius, too. We wouldn't want to put too much in it. There's something interesting there worth exploring, but we wouldn't want to have an equivalence. Because your dyslexic means that you're more likely to become a genius. The fact that you have a really high... I wouldn't say that. Well, though... The fact that you have a really high IQ means that you're inevitably going to become a genius. It makes things more interesting as these things coalesce and come together in the individual brain that you have a high IQ, and that you might be dyslexic, and that the conditions were right that genius may emerge, but we don't have the recipe that gives you that inevitable. It may not even be a recipe, because it could be that we have several alternative ways of attaining the same end. In fact, I had worked with a graduate student, and we published earlier this year a study we did in African Americans, and the testis hypothesis. And this hypothesis is something we call diversifying experiences, and that somehow we got to break a person away from the path of conventional thinking, conventional learning, towing a line, conforming to what everybody else believes. If you're going to become a major innovator. The thing is, though, there's no one way you need to do that. There are multiple ways you can do that. So there's a large inventory of childhood experiences, and things like both physical and cognitive disabilities are in that list, that seem to have higher frequencies, but they're not high enough to say, well, that's essential. It's just one of several different options. A parent dying is another one. Yeah, a parent dying, orphanhood. Another thing. Some kind of trauma in early childhood often is associated with later creative achievement, but you can have too much. We talk about a sweet spot. So all these things you can collect, it can be one of those things, you know? And then you find a sweet spot, and that sweet spot will vary according to other things. So the reason why we're focused on African Americans is they obviously have a lot of diversifying experiences beyond what majority culture Americans have to deal with, and we actually looked at things like major episode discrimination and things like that in their lives. These are all very eminent people. Like Maya Angelou was in the sample. In fact, we published a study just before she died. But anyway, and what we found, of course, is that for African Americans, the sweet spot is lower. So you can have too much of these diversifying experiences. Whereas if you're in the majority culture, you're the threat of just doing everything the way everybody else is doing it as much greater, then you need a bigger push of these things. But the point, to get back to the original question, is that all these things are involved, and if you have too many of them, then you're going to be over the sweet spot. So if that dyslexia plus your lost your mom, or whatever it happens to be, that may be too much for you to handle. And of course, there's also a resiliency factor that may be in your own constitution. So people have more resiliency than others as well. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.