 So I thought to start us off, I might refer back to comments that were introduced by Peter yesterday on Bins-Vanger and Warburg, that foreshadow some of what we'll discuss, as well as Francois's comments in the latter part of the proceedings, where he referenced the role of the unconscious in creation and recognition of the creative products. So if either of you would like to start, we'll take it from there. It seems to me one point that's been overlooked so far in the symposium is that the psychoanalytic method is very analogous to Warburg's method of close attention to detail, the hair in a Roman sarcophagus and the hair in buttecelli, and that the small attention to detail is also, of course, a psychoanalytic method, that it's a different kind of listening and any kind of social slips that we hear in conventional conversation, we overlook them, and don't make out anything, make anything out of them. But in psychoanalytic work, you pay close attention to the most minor verbal and nonverbal, and the whole clinical teaching of Wilhelm Reich is to focus on the nonverbal, the body, the posture, the way the man comes into the room, and the way he sits down or lays down whether he straightens the cuffs and the seam of his pants and so on. It communicates a great deal and psychoanalytically, the emphasis on the small detail is also what Warburg has in common, and it was mentioned once yesterday, but I think it deserves a little more, the technique of Carlo Ginsburg, who looks at the single case history in depth and the minor things that took place in an inquisition interrogation and so on, and what the man had to say, the Miller, so on. So I think that when the illustration was made, there was a reference yesterday to the position of Moses's foot. Now I would say in that great statue of Michelangelo in the Church of San Pietro in Vinkoli, in Romain, the Corzo Cabor, the small detail that one should focus on and that Freud focused on was not the foot, but the finger which pulled aside that torrent of a beard. It looks like a waterfall coming down a masterpiece and designed for the Pope Julius' tomb, but this indicates for Freud, and I think we can go with him on this, ambivalence about action. The theory, it's the second time Moses came down from the mountain and he was again enraged and thought of smashing the tablets and thought of it. I think it's not a coincidence, it's time-specific. From there I would say that the fearful and the big thing that I'm not really hearing is the demonic, bestial blood consuming that Barbara feared that came out in his psychosis, murders, kidnapping, threat, and I think that there's been a decline. I think Freud was right in civilization, it's discontent, it's 1930, there's been a decline in civilized and that really should be put in quotation marks. He's behavior just as when he writes about civilized sexual morality and modern nervous illness, he's mocking it and that civilization by 1930 was in danger and he says so, this is explicit of Erebus is in danger of destroying itself. There's that much aggression and one of the things that happened in the psychosis is that the aggression wasn't contained, it wasn't bounded and it's really a comment on civilization and if Freud had lived until 1945 we can only fantasy what he might have written about the state of civilization but who are we to say he was wrong? I think there's been a decline and I think we're on American soil now and you may know that the American national anthem, the Stars Bangled Banner was written by Francis Scott Key as he was in Baltimore Harbor in the War of 1812 to 14 which is the American part of the Napoleonic Wars and he was not a prisoner, he was on a truth ship with a British admiral in a British general and he had gone down on this truth ship to free a certain Baltimore physician who she got out of British captivity and they were watching the bombardment of a fort, Fort McHenry and the British admiral in general said now you've been with us, you've dined with us and we can't let you go back because you now know our plan for invading Baltimore, that we're going to bombard the fort and then make a landing and try to come in on the east side and so on and so they held him captive during this night in which he watched the bombardment and that's those are the words of the Stars Bangled Banner but there's a level of civilization there between adversaries at war that you know they treated him well, he had to be held for an extra day for this reason and there's a level of civilization in the American Revolutionary War when you read in the letters of Thomas Jefferson, he was governor of Virginia at the time and he invited British captive officers to dine in Monticello and there's a nice exchange of correspondence where they thank him for his graciousness and he said you know we may have countries who are at war but we can still be civilized to each other, we've had a debasement really it seems to be of values and I think that the Warburg picture is very much a part of that. Okay, well I'll jump in later, go ahead. Okay, perhaps a question for me, confronting psychoanalysis and history of art who work of Warburg is the common point between these two fields of investigation of research. I think effectively that unconscious is a common point, an intersection and we have to know how Warburg informs fraud and how fraud informs Warburg about unconscious, the dimension of creativity of unconscious, the timeless dimension of unconscious, the dimensionality of unconscious is really important in the creative process and also to interpret artistic works. But today in this morning I think the question, very difficult question is the place of psychosis in the process of thinking of Warburg. I am a psychoanalyst and a psychiatrist and it's difficult to speak about psychosis of Warburg that I didn't know, I have no clinical interview with him, I've only his work. Freud said about Schreber that it was possible to read the psychosis directly in the text of the President Schreber. We don't need to see the patient but I think it's difficult because as a psychoanalysis analyst we have always the risk to be specialized in the prediction of the past. It is an important message to have the history of Warburg, of Warburg work, to look at it from Nemusin for example, Mark Leiben, the Atlas and so on and to use the creativity, the scientific creativity of Warburg to interpret this strange moment between 1918 and 1924 when he was first in Vienna for psychotic breakdown and after he was in the Binslangerklinik at Käuzlingen near Zurich and we have access to that description of everyday life of Warburg in this clinic and it was very ill, very difficult moment of his life and how can we make a relationship between these data of the clinical state of Warburg and his mental illness and also to make a relationship with his thinking and art investigation. And I think it is a clinical problem, it is a medical problem, it is also a theoretical problem to make this kind of causality, this kind of relation but we can try to do it. But for me it is necessary to be really prudent in the construction of something between mental state and intellectual production. It is very easy to make the relation afterwards and to use a retrospective projection, the illusion of a retrospective and a reflection is difficult. I have a point, it is important to think about unconscious for one part and about psychoses for the other part. For me the work of Warburg after the psychotic breakdown, perhaps we can discuss about a real access to something new through the psychotic breakdown of Warburg. Because I can speak about applied psychoses to investigation of art, applied psychoses we have to discuss about that, the hypothesis, applied psychoses because we can say it is delirium, delirium Freud was speaking about the question of truth in delirium, direct access to the other, to important access, to access to the meaning, too much meaning, like if a scanner of analysis of the world, delirium and truth, it is one question, one level question. The other level is for me invention, psychotic invention and Warburg created new ideas about art. It was perhaps inventions, but these inventions finally revealed to be discovery and for me to find how to associate delirium and truth, invention, why not, psychotic invention and discovery is a very important field of investigation. There are some mathematicians, we can speak about Nash, for example, we can speak about Newton, why not, we were people with these strange borders, strange limits between invention and investigation, when an invention and discovery, when an invention become a discovery, it was for me an important question about value. Really getting at the heart of a dialectical question that runs through much of psychoanalytic thinking about, you know, is there a dialectical relationship between psychosis and creativity, disorder and order, entropy and organization? Exactly, exactly, we can say that for artists, it is perhaps well known, better known, artist with psychotic problems, have a creative, or they lose completely the creativity or they have a possible creativity. But here we are speaking about scientific creativity in a psychotic thinking and I think it is a great question for us, for psychoanalysts, for psychoanalysts, but also to think the relationship between the process of creativity. We are historians too, I think you stated very well and within psychoanalytic history there is something of an anticipation of that, say, in Aaron's chris' regression in the service of the ego. It is very interesting to think how close Chris was to the Warburg school and how important it was to him and just to follow up on some of the comments here. In the work that I have done in studying Warburg's ideas and also for Zoxel's ideas in comparison to Freud and to Chris, what strikes me is not only an intersection in idea and theory, but a kind of methodological intersection that Peter also was referring to. I was interested first to see how psychoanalysts interpreted culture, and I was interested in seeing how the interpreters of culture were using psychology and Warburg was absolutely crucial in this. One idea I think that Warburg was advancing so to speak without putting it this way. He talked about the afterlife of antiquity, but the return of the repressed, and that this was an idea, an attitude or an interest of those in psychology and culture in the early 20th century that could bridge what they were doing. Warburg, what interested me in Warburg is not only the idea, but the methodology he was pursuing before his breakdown. What I found interesting was this, the very close attention to detail, when you read Warburg's essays, and don't before expanding upon the content of his ideas or theories, but just the methodological approach of his essays. How extraordinarily careful he is in building an argument. Excessively careful. It's very interesting to point out, because as we're talking about him, we're talking about very large, universalistic conceptions that stretch across time and borders that were very important to him, and that psychology was key to establishing this. In his own essays, how interested he was in particularities, and being able to cite the source of almost every single proposition that he was making. And so he could argue, you know, God is in the detail, right, was one of his phrases, right? He could also say the devil is in the detail, but God is in the detail. Also his idea that within the image, the image is an accretion across time. What attaches to the image is as important as the final product that we see. And that Warburg didn't follow this as much as they Zoxel did. I mean, Zoxel was very taken by the idea that you could trace these accretions and sort them out in an even more detailed analysis. And of course, Warburg thought that the image was in fact a kind of action, that to do art was repeating an action, the action that was portrayed, and that it was a step from ritual, which was too close to something that was further from it, more symbolic. And he was very careful, and he saw the images, he saw images not only as documents in the way we've been talking about it, but he saw it was essential to apply documents to an understanding of the image. And so when he was in Florence, he was not only looking, he was only looking within the churches at the images, he was going into the archives, the family letters, the family correspondences. And he was key to developing a method of studying art through the patrons, through patronage, through study of pageantry and ritual at the time. And to come back to the point I began with, before the breakdown, he is so careful to establish this context, that the context was almost away, was both an advanced methodology for interpreting the image, but almost a way you can almost feel him trying to keep composed, trying to keep these ambivalent, conflicting issues he's dealing with, both within himself and culture, to find this balance. And it's fascinating to read his scholarly method as a way of sort of trying to keep himself together, and moving forward. And then comes the stage, right, where invention and investigation suddenly merge. Perhaps not. And he can say something about your argument, because it seems to me very important when he was in Yanai, after in Bins Van Gehr clinic at Kuy Tlingen, he has this problem that was very important for Bins Van Gehr, the flight of ideas, and too much meaning, everything in relation to everything, and to have a too big access to the meaning. And I asked me about the process of healing of Verburg. And we can say that the question of the details is very important, and it has something like, if we can say, metonymic style of thinking, thinking from the part to arrive to the global meaning, starting from the part, from the detail. The God is in the detail. It's the idea is like he was looking for a root of himself in the detail. And we have for one part, flight of ideas, and for the other part, metonymic style of thinking, interval, detail, the movement, the foot of the Ninfia Furentina, the foot of the Gardiva for Freud, the foot of the boys, moments of suspension, a rupture in the flight of ideas. And I think perhaps we can have the hypothesis that he cured himself using the interval, the suspension of the action, because he was in a flow of action, and all his intellectual work and intellectual creativity was here to stop these flight of ideas. And perhaps it is linked together in the process of creativity, process of scientific creativity of verbal. We think this frame of mind of trying to find parallels between artists and psychoanalysts. I would like to introduce a third term, which I think is absolutely crucial, and that's historiography. I think that both complicates and expands the whole frame of what we're discussing, because it's precisely historiography. There is the analysis of the historical, the art historical text in this case, which is the form of analysis, or even a psychoanalysis. And what I find very, very interesting in this case is that the art historian himself in Christling becomes an object of analysis by a psychoanalysis, namely Ben Swanger, who not only analyzes him, but also his writings. We know that he had read before he heard Christling in a famous lecture on the snake ritual that not heard he had read carefully his works. He mentioned Luther in his correspondence, which was just published in 1921, year before he arrived in Christlingen. In a letter he mentions the society essay of 1907. And from certain comments we definitely understand that he had read the dissertation on B it's telling. I'd like to bring one example, which is he, Ben Swanger's comment after Barbara gave his lecture on the image of the Pueblo in 1923. And his comment was rather dismissive. He was very critical that the lecture was almost chaotic in its structure. And of course, that Barbara was content and he was met with success. But he had a lot of criticisms. And in fact, he mentioned something that I find very symptomatic. He says that what he does is he covers everything with so much accessory element. And he calls that bivac. He uses the term. And the main events are left as philological illusions that very few people in the audience can understand. I think that's the most ingenious diagnosis that Ben Swanger ever had of Barbara, beyond his mental condition, but of his own work, even if he's critical and negative. Because that's precisely the core of Barbara's logic. That is to bring the accessory or the detail, as we said, that is so much used in second analytic interpretation to the very center of interpretation. But of course, he's right to say that things are covered by accessories. But then we can start asking ourselves, what's precisely the function of these accessory elements, both in Barbara's historiography, but also in Freud's analysis. For example, that to me, if I can make a parallel function similar to the role of screen memories, images that appear again and again, and cover the main facts. And yet the only access we have to the main facts are these screen memories. And we have to go and move through them. And usually there are certain details. There's an image of the little botanical specimen flower, which is connected to all these different things. And to the flower bouquet that Freud wanted to give you his life, to the little book that he had seen in a bookstore, and finally to Opium and Prokene, which is the main effect. But we were never have gone there without the image of the little flower. So I'm thinking, what if we think of images in these terms, in art history? And see what appears as an accessory element that covers things can also reveal them. Oh no, it's an excellent discussion, because it's also a discussion about a lesson of clinic. To treat a psychotic breakdown, it's not only to put it away, but to use the solutions of the subject. And here with detailed historiography, the context, all these kind of things we can postulate that Ben Zwanger used that to treat verbal, not treatment, putting away the symptoms, but treatment using the solution that opened the symptoms of the patient. And perhaps it was an important contribution. I know, for example, that Ben Zwanger proposed that to Prince Horne will come to his clinic to meet verbal and to discuss with him about creation and art and so on. The thing is that he gave Prince Horne's book on publication in 1922, and gave it to Ben Zwanger, to Barbara. This is what today you'd call a relational method of treatment. He also had Barbara to tea and to dinner with the family, which is the method he acquired from his teacher, Euigen Bloyler, used to bring patients in the Bergholsley, including Sabina Spielrine, and you find letters from Bloyler to Mrs. Spielrine and, rest of them, the Don about her behavior is much better today, and we had her to tea and so forth. And I think the very humanistic treatment, the reward, would be you get to go for a walk with Ben Zwanger and his son when the......Stubborn wouldn't need his breakfast. Ben Zwanger laid down the rule. You have to eat your breakfast by ten o'clock, and then you can go for a walk with me and so on. Now, I question this idea of really psychosis and creativity. I don't think it's that simple. I think that Lawrence Kubi had a correct intuition when he went back past the structural model to the topographic model. He said there's something that happens between the unconscious, which admits ideas to the preconscious, and then you can work with them from the preconscious. He goes back to the early model, and that's his model of creativity. I think when you read Kafka, for example, he says, an artist cannot be alone enough, meaning he has to go inside deeply and bring it up and work with it. Now, Warburg was not particularly creative after release from the Croitsling, and he gave a couple of addresses, talks to opening Congresses and so on. But there's another kind of creativity that psychoanalysis, free sexuality, and Warburg was able to enjoy a relationship with his assistant, Gertrude, and they went to Rome several times, long trips to Italy. There's a downside to that, that he necessarily, not necessarily strike that, that he didn't remain attentive to his family. When his wife writes, what shall we give the children for holiday? He's dismissive. Buy them whatever they want. But we have ample record that there he was in Roma and in Italy having a very good time. I suggest there's a new release of a sexual freedom that came out of his treatment. The harsh underside of European culture, remember that charming anecdote that in 1929, when the Pope signed the Concordot with Mussolini, and it meant that Catholic instruction would be given in schools and across in all the classrooms in the secular kingdom of Italy, which since 1871 had been secular, there was great activity on the streets of Roma, and they told him, don't go out, it's dangerous for foreigners, you don't know what's going to happen. He stayed out all day and half the night and came back and he said, you know, I've been studying the primitive underside of European culture for 40 years, and now you deny me the chance to see the rebirth of the primitive here in Rome. It was, I think, what he's looking for in culture, the primitive underside. And Freud also incidentally found this in himself during World War I, terrible. There was, mentioned yesterday, I think it was Diddy Huberman, that you could send a letter from belligerent Italy to Austria and vice versa. I don't know what his data is, but Freud's correspondence with Binswonger, detailed, how after the war, his son is still in captivity, in the Abruzzi, he's wounded, he's in a hospital, he's lost his pack, and Freud cannot communicate with him. All they had was a postcard from the Red Cross, and so Freud writes to Binswonger, and it's a long correspondence about this. If you are in neutral Switzerland, you can get money to him, please help him. And in fact, Binswonger did that, sent 500 Swiss francs to Martin, and we have Martin's memoirs, where he said, due to my father's excellent international collections, I was able to buy drinks for all the other prisoners. Now that's the ego functioning of a very good father, but in himself, Freud discovers. You remember the dream, which he, fortunately for us, the interpretation of dreams is something that he revised and added to. It's in the chapter on wish fulfillment in dreams, as a dream of 1919. Take a look at it, the text by the manifest, let me just tell you about the, the manifest content is that he gets a check and says to his wife, this is dream content, what is this, 5000 croner? Do you know anything about it? And she said, no. And he said, well, we received this, an association, that's what a unit sends to the family of killed soldiers, under of a seer. And so then later in the dream, he sees a bandaged man reach for something up in a cupboard, and he says, can I help you and the man doesn't answer. That's the manifest content and the latent content that he then associates to is who doesn't answer, the dead don't answer. And he brings about the death of his son. I think the relation between manifest and latent content, you can see it in verbous historiography itself, that is, especially towards his sources. I wanted to mention Freud, for example, he does not appear in any of the published sources, but so do not appear at the people like Darwin or Vignonle that were important to him. So it's precisely his notes, the things that are today kept in the title custom that give us a much more complete idea of what he had read. And they give us the background beyond what has been published. And also, it's your remark that, well, he didn't do much after he came back, he did a lot. But no publication, you're right. Nothing was published. But he gave lectures, he gave courses, he gave a nice exhibition. And also, the work of our book throughout his life, even before the collabs, was precisely that of making research. And the research would not always lead to a publication. There are hundreds of unfinished lectures, just for the sake of research that are there, and somebody else perhaps later will come and finish them and publish them. Exactly. Yeah. And they'll be very happy. And I also wanted to mention, in terms of its relation to Freud, that's also a big mystery, because there are very few notes on Freud in the title guest. And I looked at it two or three, one of the town do one thing, okay, we know he didn't have his books with him at the time. Couldn't he ask his finger? You know, his finger had all the Freud's work at the time. So I really want to ask what the phrase I miss Freud taught him in taboo. And which chapter? The third chapter on animism? Or the second chapter on prohibition, or the killing of the father on the fourth? All of these issues, that as I say, Freud is somewhat a latent content in verbal. That's why we were also happy when the new Vermont book came out and made these connections manifest at that time. And I think the relation to psychonality is important there. But that's, I would say, the latent connection to all sorts of different authors and writings is an element of verbal. And also how he converts everything. I would not call Varebuk, either like Freudian or Davidian or anything. Anything that he takes from other authors, he totally metabolizes it. There's a huge distance between him, which is I think a thinking distance. An analogy which has to be limited in encountering Warburg as a scholar and the methods he used, I thought of a completely different type of historian, the completely different vision. And it was E.P. Thompson. Only because once E.P. Thompson was asked, how would you define your method as a historian? And his answer was anything that works. And I think that sums up E.P. Thompson brilliantly. That was his mindset. And you read through Warburg's pre-1923 writings and even the Hopi lecture. He was willing to try anything that worked. And I think that it's very significant to keep in mind when thinking about why discuss Warburg in connection with psychoanalysis, with neuroscience. I keep going back to the method. And the theories, I find they can be inspirational. But for people who are pursuing work from different disciplines, I think it's the methodological spirit, the methodological activity that seems so crucial. When he says, you know, God's within the detail, when Freud talks about the importance of detail, I also think, for example, of a neuroscientist, right, Erkendell, who in search of memory described that, you know, his methodology was one cell at a time. One cell at a time. And that's not so far removed from Warburg and that in that early 20th century approach. You know, one detail at a time. Now what Warburg found in the sort of detail of the nymph, right, I just add to follow up on where there could be intersection and instinct theory. Warburg also found death in the nymph. Not just the sort of return of the repressed, but death. And I think it's possible to compare, for example, what he was doing in interpreting the Botticelli with what Freud was doing in the theme of the three caskets and interpreting the fates and interpreting, especially Cordelia in the end, that this too, I mean, Shakespeare was Renaissance in that sense. And Cordelia, you know, is in a sense Freud's nymph as Grediva was. And Cordelia is death. And represented very much, very similarly in the sort of mental image, which is another issue that I thought would be interesting. You know, Warburg's, you know, that the image that we see is also accompanied by mental image that has to be understood. But the, those links as well, but methodologically, I think, yes, if one wants to build upon Warburg, I think one turns to the methodology. But that's speaking from someone who comes at it as a historian, and neither an art historian nor psychologist. I wouldn't have if you'd agree that the Croydselian lecture, the method is presendges, Fernand Braudel, and the method we call Anal today. The environment, the climate, the really. That's very, yes, there's elements of that. The first time that you use the term oovald, right, which is very negative. I think it's an important field of research in this conference, is the research conference that we have to work about it, because it's not for me important to know if Freud was before or marble before, or the marble knows Freud and so on. But we have the same questions at stake in the same moment, and in different fields of research. It's very, something very impressive for an historical point of view. Why do you have, simultaneously, Freud? Why not the so-so for the question of the meaning in Geneva? You have Schoenberg changing completely the music. You have Cézanne in painting. You have a simultaneous change in different fields. And for me, it's very surprising, very, very strange. Even if they don't know them between. I don't know for historical point of view, what is this kind of simultaneity? Paul Ombart had the idea of an encounter between different intellectual living at the same time, discussing what will be the discussion between, we have to create the discussion between Freud and Verborg about detail, if you have a prior fiction. They come together. It's not me and you, it's Freud and Binswanger and Verborg discussing about the function of metonymic thinking in the analysis of detail in clinic and history of art. We are in this kind of situation. The other question that was presented about the tournament taboo, I miss my tournament taboo, is fascinating and my association would be to murder. It's the murder of sons and then the murder of the father and this is something he was very obsessed with. The outbreak of the psychosis was getting a pistol in Homburg, 1921, 18, but it's not a country that had the Second Amendment and weapons all over the place. He was afraid of murders, of his family, of himself and so on. Tournament taboo, it's a wonderful. The other question about your president discussion is the fact that for me I had the impression like you said that Verborg, after the breakdown after the clinic of Binswanger between 1924 and the death in 1929, had a very important creative work. After life, ready to be. Exactly. Reanimated. Yes, have the impression of that. It is the second language. The library, the nemosign, all these research we discussed yesterday was very central after this experience of psychosis. What you see is a kind of condensation of the things. He goes back to the early things, even the Bodicelli and others, and condenses and I don't want to say systematizes. Somehow he puts together in the Nemo Ximian, Atlas, etc. All of these themes that come back with all the Bodicelli and others and some new ones such as Northern Renaissance, Baroque art that he never had touched before. So, he revisits his own work with a new point of view. I want to mention one other detail in the Kreuzlingen lecture. There's one word that comes up and it's the only pathological one and it's the term schizoid in the very second page of the published text. And he says that to us, and that's a critique. I don't know who he means us, the westerners, the audience, etc. This dual practice between fantastic magic and sober perpersonist seems to be the symptom of a cleavage. But to the Indian, this is not schizoid, that he uses the term schizoid, but the sign of an endless communicability with the environment. So this is one time, and I don't know who he refers to. The Indians, himself, it's one of these really dramatic moments that his own state and the state of an entire culture that is considered schizoid, and that's his accusation. This is not schizoid. And that also sounds less far-book and more, I would say, Ben Zwanger of the phenomenological era, the endless communicability with the environment. That's not for the audience. The Freud would consider the finely-hish oomphat, the hostile environment that we have to protect ourselves. It's a very interesting remark, and perhaps you can say something about that through your work about verbal, because I was surprised that in the beginning, and it is also present in the letter of Ben Zwanger to Freud in November 1921 for Ben Zwanger for a verb was a schizophrenic patient. In the School of Zurich, Bergelsli, he looked at the pre-senial delirium and something like a schizophrenia. And after the consultation of Kraplin in 1923, I think, Kraplin said it's not schizophrenic, it is an endless flight of ideas, a mania. He said it is a mixed mania codepressive state with a very good pronostic. And after this diagnosis of Kraplin, the vision of Ben Zwanger about verbal changed completely, and the evolution of, like if it was a change of paradigm, suddenly a change of paradigm, for Ben Zwanger, for the clinic, but also for verbal game self. But it is why it is very good that they prepared this book about the different documents with the idea of endless healing. It's a flight of ideas, the flight of ideas become an endless healing. But I think there's a consensus, I'm hearing a consensus that was a successful treatment, that there's a reconstitution, and whether this is a new burst of creativity, I don't think so. I'm building the library, an obsessively building the library was a major feat in Hamburg and the details of the architecture and that they had tubes to send things from top to bottom and so on. So, I think it's a lovely building, which, do you know the, bibliotheca, John Giacomo Feltronelli in Milan, the dome with the lights coming through? That's what it reminded me of, the photographs that we've seen. What you point to is something to focus on about his post-Cortslingen life. It's interesting also to think about in light of the library, because Warburg in the library was to create a kind of community, so to speak, for himself, that he could not create for himself in the outside world and maybe began to, you know, very, very late, too late in the 20s. But when you think about how he thought of that library and the phrase he used to describe to his principal organization the Good Companion, I mean when you think about Warburg's scholarship and then that term put books next to Good Companions. That's a very different attitude now and it's not unscholatively, but it's an idea of what he's doing through his scholarship that is sort of a search for kind of community, that by putting these books together, by putting these books together, he can be, he's in some way putting the people together, and that he's communicating with them and it should be Good Companions and that makes it natural, not artificial. And to use the word natural to describe what Warburg does is very difficult at that time because it is so, you know, because his search for composure is so complete, but there in the library, right, this community that he creates for himself, one has to try to imagine, you know, what it, you can't, you can imagine what it might have felt like, but I think any scholar would be able to appreciate that. That's something that doesn't distance us from Warburg. And one more point having to do with how one finds, again, in the method an access to or at least a way of thinking about his sort of relationship to the world and to himself, when Warburg goes in search of the documents, you know, when he goes in search of family documents and business documents, I mean, he reads the accounts, you know, he's reading the bank, the business accounts and the family memoirs. Now I'm trying to picture Warburg handling the documents that were written by or being in proximity of the documents of the people that created them. And when he spoke about the artist sort of reviving antiquity, for him he thought that the artist was putting himself in some kind of danger, so to speak, that there could be some kind of spark, right, that would set something off, that there was some ego issue that could result. Well now Warburg is with these documents. And I just try to picture myself, all right, I mean now, again, methodologically, right, he's putting himself into proximity with these documents. What is going on when he does that? I have no idea. But he was very, very intent, right, on being with the documents. And I think that was something that was even very different from other art historians at the time who emphasized the same kind of procedure. Are you almost implying that there was a self-healing strategy in this piece? Perhaps. I mean, I'm not going to. I think that it was a self-healing strategy. But I think also that Binswang had used the self-healing strategy of Warburg. This is very important. Perhaps the documents, the metonymic interest for details, the metonymic style of thinking, the question of movement, of inhibition of movement, as we discussed yesterday, is very important for Warburg himself to stop something which is in too much excitation. So psychometric excitation. Excess of the leaving. Excess of meaning. Excess of the signals of the body, perhaps. And for him, perhaps the document was like a rupture. But I think it also was a risk. He was willing to undergo in some sense. In other words, a risk he had to take. I'm getting them, speculation. In other words, the two aren't, they're not opposed interpretations. But to undergo healing, you have to take a risk. And there was always, just as in the image, as healing for the artist entails a risk. And the risk that the artist took, he's taking with the documents. Or I'm completely wrong. That's not a reflection about treatment of psychosis, because to use the solution of the subject, the invention of the subject, as it is for one part risk and for one part an issue. And we have this difficult way. I think it was really important in the strategy of Bin Suang-e. I think in that question of dealing with documents, I think he tweets both documents, papers, either historical documents or even books, contemporary books. And he's encountered with people in the same way as encounters. For example, the first time he reads Darwin, he puts in his diary. 30 years later, he's going in the front cover of the book and write that I read this in 1989 and when I first read it, I thought that's finally a book that helps me. So it's an encounter that he goes back to again and again, as if the book was a real person. As Richard Vigo recently wrote an article about a bar books reading of Darwin. And the next day, he was reading that for two days in Florence in the library, the next day he meets his wife for the first time. And he leaves Darwin because he notes, finishes, and he plays the Ciceroana with Mary. So what does this mean? The most important book that I have read so far, and then the next day I meet the most important person in my life. I think psychoanalysts could, you know, put this sort of coincidence that happens at a time. And, you know, it's a periodic one. I even think, and somebody said it yesterday, you know, he had to visit the Pueblo as if it was a document, you know, and he reads them as documents. And in fact, it's sometimes when we look at the notes, we don't know some of his sketches of pottery, for example. Did he see that live or did he see it from a book? Because he also goes to the Smithsonian and other sources to look at books. So it's a scholarly research and people, life people, real people, and historical sources somehow come together in literary sources. And even, and that would be the most extreme argument that could make, is that his visit to Christ again, in Bellevue, somehow ultimately acts as this encounter with the very things that he was researching his entire life, that is, madness, irrationality, et cetera. I'm not saying that he pursued that visit, but in the end that's how it functions. There's almost an implication in what you're saying in terms of his encounter with books and objects that almost a retention of the ability to animate the inanimate that is a quality that people like Greenacre attributed to highly creative people, that what is so immediately available to us in early childhood to sort of take the inanimate and in some way make it animated or to anthropomorphize, you know, all living things. I would say even the relationship between the books that you mentioned, it's fairly, if not animistic, tautomistic. That is, you have all the books on the snake right next to the books on the ego and right next to another bird, et cetera, et cetera. So there is this totemic affinity in analogy between the books, which some time you can rearrange in new analogies. Right. Pre-corresponder. I've been to a new world. I contiguity, and not continuity, introducing a discontinuity, because what is surprising with Warburg in the library of Warburg in my impression is that it's not a psychotic confusion. It is in production tensions, rupture, contradiction, details in the process of the book. The process of the organization of the library, also in the iconology, if the image was a stop, an open question, an enigma, and not a source of confusion. And perhaps in the process of healing, it was a decisive moment when it was not in the flight of ideas and confusion, and he opposed something which is suspension, fracture, tension, and rupture, contradiction. And it was his way of breaking what he thought were artificial, even, unproductive boundaries between disciplines. I mean, the catalog of the Good Companion meant as a methodological result is that books from entirely different disciplines were going to be found next to each other. And to my mind, again, in a conference like this, that was Warburg's sort of truly kind of prescient step, that this is an alternative organization, and we must begin to conceive of this interdisciplinarity. At a time when he probably felt very constrained by that, there was no clear method forward, although in a few years Freud would found him ago, psychoanalysis applied to all of the Geysys Viscenschaft and all the humanities and social sciences. But Warburg himself in that library was his way of trying to create a framework for doing what so many people now across disciplines conceive of as necessary. Yes. But the question remains why these kind of solutions of invention were finally discovery. For me, it's very mysterious, from invention to discovery. But I think one of the things that I want to pick up about the treatment, I think it was successful, and I think it's significant of Franz Juaz, which you point out that Ben Zwanger was quite pessimistic. He said, in fact, it's hopeless in 1921 and that there's a move. Now Freud and Bloyler told us, and there's a psychodynamic truth in it, that behind every psychosis there's a kernel of truth, something happened, something that we can get at if you listen properly, get into the phenomenological world of the patient. Now one of the things in his delusions was murders, recounted briefly that he was very concerned. He had a big cartai of all the Jewish persecutions and the blood ritual murder in the barber archives. It's there. And one of his charges against Ben Zwanger was he wants to murder the Jews. Comes up several times. And I think this psychosis of murder and in the delusions in Croitslingen, he says, this male orderly is the one who poisons me every morning. And this idea that his family is in another pavilion in Croitslingen and being tortured and held captive. Even on these walks with Ben Zwanger, he would walk up to the other pavilion and knock on the door and ask for his wife Mary. So you've got a re-emergence in life of some of these early fantasies. And they get, I think it was a phenomenological treatment of a person that was successful. And you can see Ben Zwanger working with him as a... When I read the clean go, history is put together wonderfully by David Stemmily who should be here in fact. He has published that history in Italian, France and in German. Is the extreme ambivalence, indeed, towards the end? There's always a treatment, right? Sometimes he's devil, sometimes he's the healer as clippiest, which is inevitable, right? In every type of treatment. And then there's a very amicable correspondence after he returns to Hamburg at that point. So, and I think that all of these fears somehow don't get resolved, but somehow the object that embodies the ambivalence is basically the snake in the lecture, right? The snake is both a healer and the awful snake that belongs to the fire. And he changes. Those are the film yesterday. There are some wonderful snakes, but they're not rattlesnakes from... But it was wonderful in the film, it was an image of the actual capella in the Käuslingen that has precisely the presentation of the presenters. And we know that he in fact visited the chapel and he saw that. But it's interesting how this little object, again I don't want to call it a detail, but this small, cannot become the cause of all evil or good, etc. But everything can be condensed to it and somehow present some kind of resolution through that lecture, which is not exactly a snake ritual. The editors call this flag and went to our, but it's just an image. Yes, the writing of the memories by Schreber was a solution for Schreber. The conference about snake ritual was a solution for Wehrberg. But we are at the end of the roundtable, I think, but perhaps it will be a possibility to do another roundtable about transference. Because if we are talking about clinic, it's also the difficult question of transference in psychotic patients. And here it is transference with Binsfanger and the clinic, but also transference of Binsfanger with pride and the question of the correspondence. And it's a lot of people included like in the culture. We find the same inclusion of the thing in another semantic field. It's a wonderful way to end the roundtable, to pose questions for the future. And we're going to have the question period in the afternoon. We're going to take a 15-minute break and then the memory roundtable is going to convene. So thank you all for having me. OK. Thank you.